Leadership Without
  Easy Answers
Leadership Without
  Easy Answers
  Ronald A. Heifetz




      The Belknap Press of
     Harvard University Press
     Cambridge, Massachusetts
        London, England
Copyright © 1994 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College
                        All rights reserved
             Printed in the United States of America




       Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
          Heifetz, Ronald A. (Ronald Abadian), 1951-
      Leadership without easy answers / Ronald A. Heifetz.
                             p. em.
      Includes bibliographical references (p.  ) and index.
              ISBN 0-674-51858-6 (acid-free paper)
                      1. Leadership. I. Title.
                       HM141.H385 1994
                          303.3'4-dc20
                           94-15184
                              CIP
To Sousan
               Contents

   Foreword by Richard E. Neustadt       ix
   Introduction                           1

   Part I Setting the Frame              11
1 Values in Leadership                  13
2 To Lead or Mislead?                   28
3 The Roots of Authority                49

   Part II Leading With Authority        67
4 Mobilizing Adaptive Work               69
 5 Applying Power                       101
 6 On a Razor's Edge                    125
 7 Falling Off the Edge                 150

   Part III Leading Without Authority   181
 8 Creative Deviance on the Frontline   183
 9 Modulating the Provocation           207

   Part IV Staying Alive                233
10 Assassination                        235
11 The Personal Challenge               250

   Notes                                279
   Acknowledgments                      339
   Index                                343
                          Foreword
                   Richard E. Neustadt

This book is the product of teaching.
   The Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University teaches
students at four levels: undergraduates in voluntary, noncredit study
groups; recent graduates in two-year Masters programs; midcareer
students, on average ten years older, in one-year Masters programs;
and senior officials, civil as well as military, in a range of short
courses called "executive programs." Much of what we teach is
adapted from traditional disciplines thought to be particularly rele-
vant for public policy and its analysis, mainly from economics,
political science, political philosophy, and sociology.
   Some courses, however, are framed not by disciplinary concepts
but rather by the questions our experienced students draw urgently
from their own work in public life. "Exercising Leadership," a course
offered in various versions at all graduate levels of our student body,
attempts to give students insight on, and useful tools for working in,
a range of roles, unofficial and official, where leading others can
become essential to effective performance. Some of our students seek
such roles in elective politics, some in the military, some in law or
medicine, more in civilian bureaucracies, public, nonprofit and pri-
vate-but all will have the lead role thrust at them, perforce, as task
or opportunity, through the group memberships that mark their
professional and personal lives. Knowing this from experience, our
more mature students press us for something they can learn about
leadership-and take with them back to work.
   But what? A decade ago we asked Dr. Heifetz, a young psychia-
trist, as well as a skilled musician, who had also studied with us and
x / Foreword

so knew his fellows well, to take that question and address it afresh
in concert with our students. He has done so ever since. This book
is the result.
   I find it a striking achievement. It presents concrete prescriptions
resting on hypotheses immediately relevant for anyone who needs to
take the lead in almost any sort of social situation, under almost any
organizational conditions. Heifetz illustrates what he prescribes both
from the vantage point of highest public office and from that of
intimate interpersonal relations. On the one hand, here are the likes
of Lyndon Johnson, Martin Luther King Jr., and Mahatma Gandhi,
both in triumph and in tragedy. On the other hand, here are military
officers and men, doctors and patients, college students, and local
civic groups. Some manage, some butcher, the leader-follower rela-
tionship. Some, like LBJ, do both in turn. The cast of characters is
varied, wide-ranging, and unfailingly of interest, sketched with pre-
cision, touched by empathy, and always on point: illustrating some-
thing a practitioner can try to do (or avoid doing) in a concrete effort
to take leadership on something in particular, sometimes from a
position of authority, sometimes not.
   This prescriptiveness is what distinguishes Heifetz's book from
most works in a literature on leadership as broad as it is diverse. In
the English language alone it cascades down from Shakespeare to
contemporary sociologists, from Samuel Pepys to contemporary
memoirs and biographers. Mostly it describes, prescribing, if at all,
only by inference, the inference of analogy: "If the shoe fits, wear
it." Heifetz" in contrast, uses description only to illustrate, and his
illustrations serve only to reinforce his analysis, which is prescriptive.
It rests upon hypotheses of social interaction, some of which have
roots in Freudian psychology, some in anthropology, some in music,
but all of which have been exposed to long years of refinement by
the harsh light of reactions from practitioners in public life with
work to do, as well as lives to live.
    Heifetz's ten years with practitioner-students has done for him
somewhat the same thing seven years of Washington experience once
did for me, and it has brought him, among other places, to the same
ground I traversed more than thirty years ago in Presidential Power.
That is the ground occupied by the maker of choices in a political
system's highest formal authority, from whom leadership is both
expected and resisted by others as matters of course. I dealt with one
                                                         Foreword I xi

such, the American President in the then contemporary setting. I
sought rules of thumb to help him think strategically. All I could
prescribe for such a one was that he think today about tomorrow's
implications in each act of choice, with special reference to his
prospects for prestige and reputation. This may have been good
advice, as far as it went, but it was ambiguous: It jumbled up the
long run with the short. So it was hard to apply predictively with
confidence-as subsequent observers, even Presidents, have found.
   Heifetz's advice is richer, more suggestive, hence I hope more
usable, because his analysis goes deeper into what an authority figure
of that sort could do, both to inform himself and to guide purported
followers. Take note of social stresses; they are clues to needed work.
Take note of attacks upon you: they are clues to work avoidance.
Do not try to do the work yourself; instead, provide those followers
a holding environment within which you challenge them. Then get
up on the balcony-afford yourself perspective on the scene-to spot
the pitfalls and to take corrective action, changing pace or path.
These are terms of art; I leave it to Heifetz to define them. But I
happily acknowledge that, taken together, his rules of thumb are
likelier than mine were to help a person in the role of chief executive,
or some such, build effective strategy.
     A further strength in Heifetz, which I cannot claim, is that his
rules of thumb address strategic thinking not only by leaders in
positions of authority but also by those lacking such positions, en-
deavoring to stir their neighbors from the side, or from the rear. Some
years ago, I talked with two state legislators both of whom felt they
had gained much from the Heifetz course. The one, a committee
chairman, went home confident he could steer his committee better
than before. The other, younger, a "backbencher," went home feel-
ing able to convince and move his seniors, chairs included, from
behind!
   So "leadership" for Heifetz is distinct from the positions of author-
ity which usually are thought to be its starting point. His rules of
thumb, his principles, apply to anyone who itches to get something
done through and in company with others. That is a widespread
sensation, especially in a democracy like ours, the universe Heifetz
addresses. It follows that this book should be widely read, used, and
taught. I hope it is.
                                                  Cambridge, 1994
                      Introduction


On Wednesday, April 29, 1992, Los Angeles exploded in the most
violent and destructive American urban riots of the century.1 The
acquittal of four white policemen for criminal assault in the widely
televised beating of black motorist Rodney King unleashed a fury of
looting, arson, and killing painfully reminiscent of the 1960s. Thou-
sands of federal troops helped to restore order, but not before fifty-
two people were dead, hundreds were wounded, and more than one
billion dollars worth of property was destroyed. 2 On Friday evening,
two days later, President George Bush, in a nationally televised
speech, focused on the immediate sources of distress, condemning
the violence and promising a swift restoration of order while sug-
gesting federal action to ensure justice for King. He did not use his
authority to mobilize commitment to the larger questions that un-
derlay the riots-racism and chronic economic disparity.3
   Coincidentally during the riots, I was in Washington, D.C., con-
sulting in the government. The following three questions came up
repeatedly: Was Bush exercising leadership? What criteria could we
use to judge his actions as events were unfolding, without the benefit
of historical hindsight? Was his focus too narrow in responding to
symptoms rather than causes, or was it a necessary short-term tactic
in a strategy to address the larger issues? This book, the product of
a decade's research and teaching at Harvard University's John F.
Kennedy School of Government, addresses questions such as these
about leadership, authority, and the challenge of tackling very hard
problems.
                                  1
2   /   Introduction

   Today we face a crisis in leadership in many areas of public and
private life. Yet we misconceive the nature of these leadership crises.
We attribute our problems too readily to our politicians and execu-
tives, as if they were the cause of them. We frequently use them as
scapegoats. Although people in authority may not be a ready source
of answers, rarely are they the source of our pains. Pinning the blame
on authority provides us with a simple accounting for our predica-
ments. "Throw out the rascals! They're the reason we're in this
mess!" Yet our current crises may have more to do with the scale,
interdependence, and perceived uncontrollability of modern eco-
nomic and political life. The paucity of leadership may perpetuate
our quandaries, but seldom is it the basis for them.
   Furthermore, in a crisis we tend to look for the wrong kind of
leadership. We call for someone with answers, decision, strength, and
a map of the future, someone who knows where we ought to be
going-in short, someone who can make hard problems simple. But
problems like the Los Angeles riots are not simple. Instead of looking
for saviors, we should be calling for leadership that will challenge us
to face problems for which there are no simple, painless solutions-
problems that require us to learn new ways.
   We have many such problems: uncompetitive industry, drug abuse,
poverty, poor public education, environmental hazards, ethnic strife,
budget deficits, economic dislocation, and obstacles to constructive
foreign relations. Making progress on these problems demands not
just someone who provides answers from on high but changes in our
attitudes, behavior, and values. To meet challenges such as these, we
need a different idea of leadership and a new social contract that
promote our adaptive capacities, rather than inappropriate expecta-
tions of authority. We need to reconceive and revitalize our civic life
and the meaning of citizenship.
   These challenges are the subject of this book. To introduce them,
it seems only fair that I introduce myself and the baggage and
resources I carry into this study. I am a psychiatrist, musician, and
lecturer in public policy at the Kennedy School of Government,
where I direct the school's Leadership Education Project. As a phy-
sician, I carry several biases. The first is a belief that many problems
are embedded in complicated and interactive systems. In medicine,
for example, we want to know how the body will react to the
opening in its defenses when illness sets in.
                                                     I ntraduction   / 3

   Most professionals have a systems bias. Car mechanics, business
executives, and urban planners think systemically about problems,
focusing on the interacting parts of a car, business, or city. They often
intervene in a part of the system distant from the location of the
symptom. When a car fails to start in the morning, a mechanic rarely
locates the problem in the key switch itself, but several feet away in
the battery, starter, an electrical connection, or the alternator. When
citizens of Los Angeles rioted in response to the court's decision in
the case concerning Rodney King, the problem was not just police
brutality but injustice writ large-the festering issues of unemploy-
ment, poverty, inequity, and prejudice.
   The second bias from biology is to assume that much of behavior
reflects an adaptation to circumstances. An organism's responses to
stress-whether the stress is induced by the climate, competition,
food supply, sexual activity, or parenthood-represent adaptations
developed over the course of evolution. Often, biological adaptations
are transformative, enabling new species to thrive in changing envi-
ronments. A most dramatic example is the evolution of our human
hands, which seem to have been the trigger for a series of major
adaptive leaps, including upright posture and the human brain. 4
Together, these responses to ecological challenge have given us the
means to transform our world.
    By adapting socially, I mean developing the organizational and
cultural capacity to meet problems successfully according to our
values and purposes. And when there are conflicts over values and
purposes, which happen frequently, the clarification and integration
of competing values itself becomes adaptive work.
   As in biology, social adaptations run the gamut from minor to
transformative change. By adapting, I do not mean accepting the
status quo, or resigning ourselves to a new and bad situation. When
President Bush first met with members of his Cabinet to respond to
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, Nicholas Brady, the Treasury Secretary,
presented a strategy for coping with high oil prices in the near,
medium, and long term were Iraq to stay in Kuwait and keep prices
up. But Bush emphatically refused to "adapt" to this invasion. 5 His
use of the term makes sense and communicates clearly, but it is not
the way I use the term here. By adaptation I do not mean merely
coping, even though coping may at times be a critical part of adapt-
Ing.
4 I   Introduction

   The orchestration of many countries along with the United Na-
tions to meet the challenge of a belligerent Iraq was the beginning
of adaptive work par excellence. To break old myths in the Middle
East, form new international alliances, invigorate the United Na-
tions, and bring together much of the world community required
many people around the globe to clarify values and change attitudes,
beliefs, and behavior. A new world order that requires people to learn
better ways of living together would be an enormous social adapta-
tion, were we to achieve it. Of course, adaptation requires accom-
plishment as well as aspiration.
   As a third bias, I think of authority relationships in terms of
service. My job as a physician consists of helping people solve the
problems for which I have some expertise. That is why they author-
ize me: Authority is a trust. If in some problem situations my latitude
for action-my authorization-must expand, then the bases of my
trust may have to change.
   Furthermore, having a service orientation means having at once a
practical and prescriptive view. In being "practical," I look for ways
to apply theory and research to everyday problems. In "prescribing,"
I give advice, not simply by taking the patient's complaint at face
value but by interpreting it. Problems often present themselves am-
biguously. I interpret complaints both as symptoms of biological
stress and as indicators of psychological or social imbalance in the
individual's work and support system. I include the patient's envi-
ronment in my analysis of problems. Similarly, outside the context
of medicine, I consider a CEO's complaint about his loss of power
as a symptom of an underlying problem within his organization.
Perhaps the CEO's influence has diminished because he recently
broached disturbing issues in his organization, and the response was
to wall him off. In the medical sense, it would be poor practice to
give advice based simply on someone's initial complaint. Prescription
requires analyzing the problem in the larger system.
   This may sound obvious, but its implications are not. Many con-
sultants and theorists of leadership think they have completed their
task by advising the executive or politician on how to gain more
power, if that is what he asks for. In some cases, they may be right.
Yet it is not always enough simply to give someone what he thinks
he wants. One may have to interpret the executive's wishes in the
                                                     Introduction   /   5

context of problems facing the organization in order to help him
clarify the systemic problem so that he can then clarify what he
wants. Perhaps he would rather move the organization to face an
issue that is being avoided than to simply regain power. Perhaps he
would willingly trade power to mobilize attention to the issue. Per-
haps he has identified an issue not quite ripe for his organization's
attention and should slow down. The loss of power may indicate
that the issue requires a change in tactics.
   As a psychiatrist, I believe that many adaptive and communicative
processes are unconscious, and I learn about them by inference.
People do not always say what they "really think" or understand
why they do what they do. Moreover, many difficulties with making
headway on problems arise from poorly orchestrated and unresolved
conflicts-internal contradictions in values, beliefs, and habit. Fur-
thermore, I also believe that people's defenses deserve respect. In
identifying and raising issues, I assume that people and their social
systems are doing the best they can given their adaptive capacity and
the challenges they are up against. I assume they are working on real
problems, even if the manner of work is distorted and riddled with
avoidance. Their behavior is their effort to adapt. As a consequence,
I intervene in people's lives and social systems with the aim of
increasing their adaptive capacity-their ability to clarify values and
make progress on the problems those values define.
   Finally, psychiatry has a bias regarding how people accomplish
adaptive work. In psychotherapy, people adapt more successfully to
their environments, given their purposes and values, by facing pain-
ful circumstances and developing new attitudes and behaviors. They
learn to distinguish reality from fantasy, resolve internal conflicts,
and put harsh events into perspective. They learn to live with things
that cannot be changed and take responsibility for those that can.
By improving their ability to reflect, strengthening their tolerance for
frustration, and understanding their own blind spots and patterns of
resistance to facing problems, they improve their general adaptive
capacity for future challenge.
   Policy experts proceed with a similar bias. They help communities
by interpreting and analyzing problems, distinguishing cause from
effect, fact from fiction, and formulating and offering possible solu-
tions. They too believe that facing problems is better than neglecting
6   I   Introduction

them. Indeed, they complain, quite understandably, about the resis-
tance they meet to the troubling information they gather, analyze,
and offer.
   As a musician, I bring several metaphors from music to the study
of leadership. Music teaches that dissonance is an integral part of
harmony. Without conflict and tension, music lacks dynamism and
movement. The composer and the improvisational musician alike
must contain the dissonance within a frame that holds the audience's
attention until resolution is found.
   Music also teaches to distinguish the varieties of silence: restless,
energized, bored, tranquil, and sublime. 6 With silence one creates
moments so that something new can be heard; one holds the tension
in an audience or working group, or punctuates important phrases,
allowing time for the message to settle.
   Creating music takes place in relation to structures and audiences.
Structural limits provide scaffolding for creativity. Plato put it this
way: "If there is no contradictory impression, there is nothing to
awaken reflection."7 People create in relation to something or some-
one. Although the audience may be safely tucked inside the com-
poser's mind, still it is there. Because we do not think of creativity
as a product of relationship, audiences often do not know their
power. In a hall of five thousand, one person in the back of the
second balcony talking to a neighbor or getting up to leave has all
too real an impact. So too, in politics and organizations, people
mistakenly look to an authority figure, presuming that he or she
performs independently of them.
   Music teaches what it means to think and learn with the heart. In
part, it means having access to emotions and viewing them as a
resource rather than a liability. It also means having the patience to
find meanings left implicit. When I was a student in the Master Class
of Gregor Piatigorsky, the great Russian cellist, we cellists would play
a phrase of Brahms or Shostakovich, and Piatigorsky would launch
into a story that seemed at first to come from nowhere with no
apparent relevance to what we were doing. In time, he would often
land hawklike on his subject. But sometimes the challenge of finding
the connection was ours. If we looked hard, we could usually discern
his intent, or find our own lesson beyond his intent. We had to take
responsibility for our learning.
                                                       Introduction   /   7

   With this background, I have spent the last ten years developing
and teaching courses in leadership and authority to young adult,
midcareer, and executive students at Harvard. They have come from
governments, nonprofit institutions, and profit-making enterprises
throughout the United States and abroad. They have included top-
and middle-level managers in public agencies and private businesses,
members of Congress, congressional staff, mayors, state legislators,
city officials, entry-level public servants, diplomats, all levels of mili-
tary officers, foreign officials, journalists, community organizers, and
heads of banks. A few have been graduate students in law, business,
education, divinity, medicine, public health, and international devel-
opment.
   These practitioner students, many hundreds of them by now, have
given me the means to develop, test, and refine a set of ideas about
leadership. Beginning with the assumptions and metaphors of my
past, I have plied them for their wisdom. This book is the product
of our joint daily efforts to elucidate their successes and failures.
   Teaching students who are practitioners has forced me to look for
the fine line between generalization and practical guidance. Gener-
alizations are needed to speak to students from every conceivable
kind of organization and culture. I could not teach so varied a group
without looking for generic ideas. Yet at no time could I get away
with teaching theory disconnected from reality, as I might with a
class of undergraduates. Practitioners have little patience for ideas
that fail to speak to real experience. My students have forced me to
develop a general theory that has practical application. 8
   My practitioner students have directed my attention to the difficul-
ties they see in exercising leadership and have slanted my theory in
the direction of the kinds of adaptive work that generate perceptions
of loss, real or imagined, by people facing change. In contrast, I have
spent much less time on other forms of adaptive work, for example,
the entrepreneurial challenge of spotting and seizing untapped op-
portunities or the challenge of sustaining excellence in a well-func-
tioning operation.
   The theory presented here is empirical in the sense that it reflects
engagement with real problems. But it is not empirical in the rigorous
sense of methodically categorizing and selecting cases on which to
examine and test the full range of possible hypotheses. In the emerg-
8   /   Introduction

ing field of leadership analysis, this book represents theory-build-
ing-an effort to provide a powerful and practical conceptual frame-
work from which to launch more focused empirical research. The
book provides a source of ideas, interpretations, and conjectures,
many of which are illustrated but none of which is proven.
   My view of leadership is organized around two key distinctions:
between technical and adaptive problems, and between leadership
and authority. The first points to the different modes of action
required to deal with routine problems in contrast with those that
demand innovation and learning; the second provides a framework
for assessing resources and developing a leadership strategy depend-
ing upon whether one has or does not have authority. Viewed in
these ways, for example, our questions about Bush's leadership and
the Los Angeles riots become: What adaptive challenges in Los
Angeles and the country at large gave rise to the riots? And what
resources and constraints associated with presidential authority in
an election year did Bush have for leading the nation in meeting those
challenges? Furthermore, how could people without authority, or
with less authority, exercise leadership on the issues without waiting
for the President?
   Steeped as I am in the u.S. constitutional system, my conception
of leadership is shaped fundamentally by it. If my argument has
relevance for people from societies with other politics, that would
be fortuitous. This is an argument about the strategies of leadership
most suitable to a democratic society, as well as for economic insti-
tutions that aspire to compete in the modern world, and for other
institutions that need to inspire intense commitment of members
(particularly those ascribing to modern norms of democracy and
self-expression) rather than mere compliance.
   Part One presents an overview of the meaning of leadership,
focusing particularly on the concepts of adaptation and authority.
Parts Two and Three focus on strategies of leading with and without
authority. Part Four concludes with practical recommendations for
leading and staying alive.
   Throughout these discussions I use cases not as evidence but to
illustrate theory and enrich speculation about how individuals might
think about leadership in a variety of settings. Some of these stories
may touch on the reader's experience. They include interpersonal,
                                                  Introduction   I   9

small group, and organizational problems, as well as local, national,
and international affairs. Some are part of our recent and shared
history: "Star Wars," civil rights, and Vietnam. Although most of
the cases are taken from the public realm, these ideas have been
tested in other contexts as well: businesses, religious institutions,
schools, and nonprofit organizations.
   This book is meant for those who lead in this place and time.
Although I count on my colleagues in the academy to analyze, test,
refine, and deepen this argument, my aim here is to provide the
practitioner with a practical philosophy of leadership-an orienting
set of questions and options for confronting the hardest of problems
without getting killed, badly wounded, or pushed aside.
      Part I

Setting the Frame
                                 1
              Values in Leadership


Leadership arouses passion. The exercise and even the study of
leadership stirs feeling because leadership engages our values. Indeed,
the term itself is value-laden. When we call for leadership in our
organizations and politics, we call for something we prize. If one
asks: "Would you rather be known as a leader or a manager? A
follower or a leader?" the response is usually "a leader." The term
leadership involves our self-images and moral codes.
   Yet the way we talk about leadership betrays confusion. On one
hand, we use the word to denote people and actions of merit. During
an election year, we want "a leader" for President, rather than
"another politician." In our organizations, we evaluate managers for
their "leadership," by which we mean a particular constellation of
valued abilities. When we look abroad, we fasten the term to people
like Gorbachev, Walesa, De Klerk, or Mandela, people we admire
for their values, courage, commitment, and skill. On the other hand,
we insist that the word leadership is value-free. We say that Pablo
Escobar, head of the Medellin drug cartel, was a "leader," even if
we detested his values, because he motivated followers to realize his
vision. 1 Our media routinely use the term leader to denote people in
authority or people who have a following. We talk about the leader
of the gang, the mob, the organization-the person who is given
informal or formal authority by others-regardless of the values they
represent or the product they playa key part in producing.
   We cannot continue to have it both ways. We may like to use the
                                  13
14 / SETTING THE FRAME

word leadership as if it were value-free, particularly in an age of
science and mathematics, so that we can describe far-ranging phe-
nomena and people with consistency. Yet when we do so, we ignore
the other half of ourselves that in the next breath speaks of leader-
ship as something we desperately need more of. We cannot talk
about a crisis in leadership and then say leadership is value-free. Do
we merely mean that we have too few people in our midst who can
gather a following? Surely, we are not asking for more messiahs of
Waco and Jonestown who meet people's needs by offering tempting
visions of rapture and sacrifice. 2 The contradiction in our common
understanding clouds not only the clarity of our thinking and schol-
arship; it shapes the quality of leadership we praise, teach, and get. 3
   Understandably, scholars who have studied "leadership" have
tended to side with the value-free connotation of the term because
it lends itself more easily to analytic reasoning and empirical exami-
nation. 4 But this will not do for them any more than it will do for
practitioners of leadership who intervene in organizations and com-
munities everyday. Rigor in social science does not require that we
ignore values; it simply requires being explicit about the values we
study. There is no neutral ground from which to construct notions
and theories of leadership because leadership terms, loaded with
emotional content, carry with them implicit norms and values. For
example, when we equate leadership with holding high office or
exerting great influence, we reinforce a tendency to value station and
power. We are not simply studying or using power; we unwittingly
communicate that power has intrinsic worth.
   We have to take sides. When we teach, write about, and model
the exercise of leadership, we inevitably support or challenge people's
conceptions of themselves, their roles, and most importantly their
ideas about how social systems make progress on problems. Lead-
ership is a normative concept because implicit in people's notions of
leadership are images of a social contract. Imagine the differences in
behavior when people operate with the idea that "leadership means
influencing the community to follow the leader's vision" versus
"leadership means influencing the community to face its problems."
In the first instance, influence is the mark of leadership; a leader gets
people to accept his vision, and communities address problems by
looking to him. If something goes wrong, the fault lies with the
                                             Values in Leadership / 15

leader. 5 In the second, progress on problems is the measure of lead-
ership; leaders mobilize people to face problems, and communities
make progress on problems because leaders challenge and help them
do so. If something goes wrong, the fault lies with both leaders and
the community.
   This second image of leadership-mobilizing people to tackle
tough problems-is the image at the heart of this book. This con-
ception builds upon, yet differs from, the culturally dominant views.
For example, in popular conceptions of politics, leadership generally
refers to the exercise of influence: the leader stands out in front-
usually in high office-influencing others. The person may also be
the most influential member of a popular movement operating with
little if any formal authority, such as Lech Walesa or the Ayotollah
Khomeini (before they took political office).
   In business, we see an evolution of the concept of leadership. For
decades, the term leadership referred to the people who hold top
management positions and the functions they serve. In our common
usage, it still does. Recently, however, business people have drawn a
distinction between leadership and management, and exercising lead-
ership has also come to mean providing a vision and influencing
others to realize it through noncoercive means. 6
   In the military, the term leadership commonly refers to people in
positions of command, who show the way. Perhaps because warfare
has played a central role historically in the development of our
conceptions of leadership and authority, it is not surprising that the
ancient linguistic root of the word "to lead" means "to go forth,
die."7 In our time, leadership in the military aims to draw forth a
person's highest qualities, by influence more than coercion. "Be all
that you can be" implies preparation based on the potential that
resides in the enlistees when they enter. In the final test, however, the
troops achieve the goals prescribed by the leaders in command. 8
   In biology, leadership is the activity of flying at the front of a flock
of geese, or maintaining order in social relations and food gathering
among primates. The leader has a particular set of physical attributes
(big, colorful, fast, assertive). The leader functions as a focal point
of attention by which the rest of the group instinctively organizes
itself. Leadership is equated with prominence and dominance.
   In horse racing, a field some would say bears a resemblance to
16   /   SETTING THE FRAME


politics, leading simply means being out in front. The jockey of the
lead horse is leading nobody, except perhaps unintentionally to the
extent that other jockeys set strategy and strive harder to overtake
him.
  There seem to be two common denominators of these various
views: station and influence. Hence, many scholarly approaches to
the study of leadership during the last two hundred years focus on
the phenomena of prominent and influential people. 9 Theorists ask
the following important questions: How and why do particular
individuals gain power in an organization or society? What are their
personal characteristics? What functions do they serve? How do they
realize their vision? How do they move history, or does history move
them? What motivates them and how do they motivate others?IO

              Hidden Values in Theories of Leadership
Perhaps the first theory of leadership-and the one that continues to
be entrenched in American culture-emerged from the nineteenth-
century notion that history is the story of great men and their impact
on society. (Women were not even considered candidates for great-
ness.) Thomas Carlyle crystallized this view in his 1841 volume On
Heroes, Hero- Worship, and the Heroic in History. Although various
scientific studies discount the idea, this trait approach continues to
set the terms of popular debate. 11 Indeed, it saw a revival during the
1980s. 12 Based on this view, trait theorists since Carlyle have exam-
ined the personality characteristics of "great men," positing that the
rise to power is rooted in a "heroic" set of personal talents, skills,
or physical characteristics. As Sidney Hook described in The Hero
in History (1943), some men are eventful, while others are event-
making. 13
   In reaction to the great-man theory of history, situationalists ar-
gued that history is much more than the effects of these men on their
time. Indeed, social theorists like Herbert Spencer (1884) suggested
that the times produce the person and not the other way around. In
a sense, situationalists were not interested in leadership per see "His-
torymakers" were interesting because they stood at the vortex of
powerful political and social forces, which themselves were of inter-
est. Thus, the more or less contemporaneous emergence of the United
                                           Values in Leadership    /   17

States' first great leaders-Jefferson, Washington, Adams, Madison,
Hamilton, Monroe, Benjamin Franklin-is attributed not to a demo-
graphic fluke but to the extraordinary times in which these men lived.
Instead of asserting that all of them shared a common set of traits,
situationalists suggest that the times called forth an assortment of
men with various talents and leadership styles. Indeed, many of them
performed marvelously in some jobs but quite poorly in others. 14
Thus, "What an individual actually does when acting as a leader is
in large part dependent upon characteristics of the situation in which
he functions." 15
   Beginning in the 1950s, theorists began (not surprisingly) to syn-
thesize the trait approach with the situationalist view. Empirical
studies had begun to show that no single constellation of traits was
associated with leadership. Although this finding did not negate the
idea that individuals "make" history, it did suggest that different
situations demand different personalities and call for different be-
haviors. Primary among these synthetic approaches .is contingency
theory, which posits that the appropriate style of leadership is con-
tingent on the requirements of the particular situation. For example,
some situations require controlling or autocratic behavior and others
participative or democratic behavior. 16
   The field of inquiry soon expanded into the specific interactions
between leaders and followers-the transactions by which an indi-
vidual gains influence and sustains it over time. 17 The process is based
on reciprocity. Leaders not only influence followers but are under
their influence as well. 18 A leader earns influence by adjusting to the
expectations of followers. In one variant of the transactional ap-
proach, the leader reaps the benefits of status and influence in ex-
change for reducing uncertainty and providing followers with a basis
for action. 19 In another variant, bargaining and persuasion are the
essence of political power, requiring a keen understanding of the
interests of various stakeholders, both professional and public. 20
   Each of these theories is generally considered to be value-free, but
in fact their values are simply hidden. The great-man or trait ap-
proach places value on the historymaker, the person with extraordi-
nary influence. Although the approach does not specify in what
direction influence must be wielded to constitute leadership, the very
suggestion that the mark of a great man is his historical impact on
18   /   SETTING THE FRAME

society gives us a particular perspective on greatness. Placing Hitler
in the same general category as Gandhi or Lincoln does not render
the theory value-free. On the contrary, it simply leaves its central
value-influence-implicit. 21
   The situational approach, ironically, does something similar. It
departs radically from the great-man view by suggesting that certain
people emerge to prominence because the times and social forces call
them forth. Yet leaders are still assumed to be those people who gain
prominence in society. The people that a trait theorist would select
to study from history, the situational theorist would select as well.
   Contingency theory, synthesizing the great-man and situational
approaches, also began with a value-free image of itself. It examines
which decisionmaking style fits which situational contingency in
order for the decisionmaker to maintain control of the process.
Sometimes a directive, task-oriented style is the most effective, and
at other times a participative, relationship-oriented style is required.
Yet even in this more specific rendition of the traditional view, the
mark of leadership is still influence, or control. 22
   Advocates of transactional approaches, focusing on how influence
is gained and maintained, also see themselves as value-neutral. Al-
though they describe elegantly the relational dynamics of influence,
they do not evaluate the purpose to which influence is put or the
way purposes are derived. By stating that the mark of leadership is
influence over outcomes, these theorists unwittingly enter the value
realm. Leadership-as-influence implicitly promotes influence as an
orienting value, perpetuating a confusion between means and ends. 23
   These four general approaches attempt to define leadership objec-
tively, without making value judgments. When defining leadership in
terms of prominence, authority, and influence, however, these theo-
ries introduce value-biases implicitly without declaring their intro-
duction and without arguing for the necessity of the values
introduced. 24 From a research point of view, this presents no real
problem. Indeed, it simplifies the analytic task. The problem emerges
when we communicate and model these descriptions as "leadership"
because "leadership" in many cultures is a normative idea-it rep-
resents a set of orienting values, as do words like "hero" and "cham-
pion. "25 If we leave the value implications of our teaching and
practice unaddressed, we encourage people, perhaps unwittingly, to
                                            Values in Leadership   /   19

aspire to great influence or high office, regardless of what they do
there. 26 We would be on safer ground were we to discard the loaded
term leadership altogether and simply describe the dynamics of
prominence, power, influence, and historical causation. 27
   Although these theories were designed primarily for value-free
description and analysis, they still shed light on how to think about
practice. For example, the trait theorists encourage us to believe that
individuals can indeed make a difference. No activist can operate
without that assumption. Furthermore, the decades of scholarship
devoted to sifting and analyzing generic skills provide us with some
basis to define the goals of leadership education. The situational
approach directs us toward examining how the activity of leadership
differs depending on the context. Coupled with the contingency
approach, it tells us that the task of contextual diagnosis is central
to leadership. In addition, it provides a host of variables to consider
in analyzing different situations and the style of leadership that might
apply. This will be critical to those who lead. For example, contin-
gency theory frames the key question: Which situations call for
authoritarian behavior and which demand "democratic" processes?28
The transactional theorists contribute the basic idea that authority
consists of reciprocal relationships: people in authority influence
constituents, but constituents also influence them. We forget this at
our peril.

            Toward a Prescriptive Concept of Leadership
In this study I will use four criteria to develop a definition of lead-
ership that takes values into account. First, the definition must
sufficiently resemble current cultural assumptions so that, when fea-
sible, one's normal understanding of what it means to lead will apply.
Second, the definition should be practical, so that practitioners can
make use of it. Third, it should point toward socially useful activities.
Finally, the concept should offer a broad definition of social useful-
ness.
    How might we go about defining the term leadership in a way
that employs our current knowledge, and the values associated with
it? Leadership, which has long been linked to the exercise of author-
ity or influence, usually suggests playing a prominent and coordinat-
20   /   SETTING THE FRAME

ing role in an organization or society. To capture these uses of the
term in a definition, we can use the word "mobilize," which connotes
motivating, organizing, orienting, and focusing attention.
     Rather than define leadership either as a position of authority in
a social structure or as a personal set of characteristics, we may find
it a great deal more useful to define leadership as an activity.29 This
allows for leadership from multiple positions in a social structure. A
President and a clerk can both lead. It also allows for the use of a
variety of abilities depending on the demands of the culture and
situation. Personal abilities are resources for leadership applied dif-
ferently in different contexts. As we know, at times they are not
applied at all. Many people never exercise leadership, even though
they have the personal qualities we might commonly associate with
it. 3D By unhinging leadership from personality traits, we permit ob-
servations of the many different ways in which people exercise plenty
of leadership everyday without "being leaders."
     The common personalistic orientation to the term leadership, with
its assumption that "leaders are born and not made," is quite dan-
gerous. It fosters both self-delusion and irresponsibility. For those
who consider themselves "born leaders," free of an orienting phi-
losophy and strategy of leadership, their grandiosity is a set-up for
a rude awakening and for blindly doing damage. Minimally, they can
waste the time and effort of a community on projects that go, if not
over a cliff, then at least in circles. 31 Conversely, those who consider
themselves "not leaders" escape responsibility for taking action, or
for learning how to take action, when they see the need. In the face
of critical problems, they say, "I'm not a leader, what can I do?"32
     So, we ought to focus on leadership as an activity-the activity of
a citizen from any walk of life mobilizing people to do something.
But what is the socially useful something? What mode of leadership
is likely to generate socially useful outcomes? Several approaches to
these questions might work. We could imagine that a leader is more
likely to produce socially useful outcomes by setting goals that meet
the needs of both the leader and followers. 33 This has the benefit of
distinguishing leadership from merely "getting people to do what
you want them to do." Leadership is more than influence.
     Even so, setting a goal to meet the needs of the community may
give no definition of what those needs are. If a leader personally
                                            Values in Leadership / 21

wants to turn away from the difficulty of problems, and so do his
constituents, does he exercise leadership by coming up with a fake
remedy?
   To address this problem, the leadership theorist James MacGregor
Burns suggested that socially useful goals not only have to meet the
needs of followers, they also should elevate followers to a higher
moral level. Calling this transformational leadership, he posits that
people begin with the need for survival and security, and once those
needs are met, concern themselves with "higher" needs like affection,
belonging, the common good, or serving others. 34 This approach has
the benefit of provoking discussion about how to construct a hier-
archy of orienting values. However, a hierarchy that would apply
across cultures and organizational settings risks either being so gen-
eral as to be impractical or so specific as to be culturally imperialistic
in its application.
   We might also say that leadership has a higher probability of
producing socially useful results when defined in terms of legitimate
authority, with legitimacy based on a set of procedures by which
power is conferred from the many to the few. This view is attractive
because we might stop glorifying usurpations of power as leadership.
But by restraining the exercise of leadership to legitimate authority,
we also leave no room for leadership that challenges the legitimacy
of authority or the system of authorization itself. 35 No doubt, there
are risks to freeing leadership from its moorings of legitimate author-
ity. To take one celebrated case, perhaps we risk encouraging com-
mitted zealots like Oliver North. Yet we also face an important
possibility: social progress may require that someone push the system
to its limit. Perhaps Andrei Sakharov served such a role in the
democratization of the former Soviet Union. Hence, a person who
leads may have to risk his moral state, and not just his health and
job, to protect his moral state. 36 Defining leadership in terms of
legitimate authority excludes those who faced moral doubt and deep
regret by defying authority. Vaclav Havel, Lech Walesa, Aung San
Suu Kyi, Martin Luther King Jr., Margaret Sanger, and Mohandas
Gandhi, to name a few, risked social disaster by unleashing uncon-
trollable social forces.
   Business schools and schools of management commonly define
leadership and its usefulness with respect to organizational effective-
22   I   SETTING THE FRAME

ness. Effectiveness means reaching viable decisions that implement
the goals of the organization. This definition has the benefit of being
generally applicable, but it provides no real guide to determine the
nature or formation of those goals. 37 Which goals should we pursue?
What constitutes effectiveness in addition to the ability to generate
profits? From the perspective of a town official viewing a local
corporation, effectiveness at implementation seems an insufficient
criterion. A chemical plant may be quite effective at earning a profit
while it dangerously pollutes the local water supply. We are left with
the question: Effective at what?
   This study examines the usefulness of viewing leadership in terms
of adaptive work. Adaptive work consists of the learning required
to address conflicts in the values people hold, or to diminish the gap
between the values people stand for and the reality they face. Adap-
tive work requires a change in values, beliefs, or behavior. The
exposure and orchestration of conflict-internal contradictions-
within individuals and constituencies provide the leverage for mobi-
lizing people to learn new ways.38
   In this view, getting people to clarify what matters most, in what
balance, with what trade-offs, becomes a central task. In the case of
a local industry that pollutes the river, people want clean water, but
they also want jobs. Community and company interests frequently
overlap and clash, with conflicts taking place not only among fac-
tions but also within the lives of individual citizens who themselves
may have competing needs. Leadership requires orchestrating these
conflicts among and within the interested parties, and not just be-
tween the members and formal shareholders of the organization.
Who should play a part in the deliberations is not a given, but is
itself a critical strategic question. Strategy begins with asking: Which
stakeholders have to adjust their ways to make progress on this
problem? How can one sequence the issues or strengthen the bonds
that join the stakeholders together as a community of interests so
that they withstand the stresses of problem-solving?
   To clarify a complex situation such as this requires multiple van-
tage points, each of which adds a piece to the puzzle. Just as clari-
fying a vision demands reality testing, reality testing is not a
value-free process. Values are shaped and refined by rubbing against
real problems, and people interpret their problems according to the
                                           Values in Leadership    I 23

values they hold. Different values shed light on the different oppor-
tunities and facets of a situation. The implication is important: the
inclusion of competing value perspectives may be essential to adap-
tive success. In the long run, an industrial polluter will fail if it
neglects the interests of its community. Given the spread of environ-
mental values, it may not always be able to move across borders.
Conversely, the community may lose its economic base if it neglects
the interests of its industry.
   The point here is to provide a guide to goal formation and strategy.
In selecting adaptive work as a guide, one considers not only the
values that the goal represents, but also the goal's ability to mobilize
people to face, rather than avoid, tough realities and conflicts. The
hardest and most valuable task of leadership may be advancing goals
and designing strategy that promote adaptive work. 39
   Does this forsake the image of leadership as a visionary activity?
Not at all. It places emphasis on the act of giving clarity and articu-
lation to a community's guiding values. Neither providing a map for
the future that disregards value conflicts nor providing an easy way
out that neglects the facts will suffice for leadership.40 Guiding values
are interpreted in the context of problems demanding definition and
action. 41 People discover and respond to the future as much as they
plan it. Those who lead have to learn from events and take advantage
of the unplanned opportunities that events uncover. 42 They have to
improvise. In the midst of the Great Depression, Franklin Roosevelt
called for "bold, persistent experimentation." As he put it, "It is
common sense to take a method and try it. If it fails, admit it frankly
and try another. But above all, try something. "43
   As an example to compare these frames of reference, we can use
the case of Roosevelt's adversary, Adolf Hitler. When influence alone
defines leadership, Hitler qualifies as an authentic and successful
leader: he mobilized a nation to follow his vision. Indeed, he inspired
millions of people to organize their lives by his word. Even with the
added criterion that goals have to meet the needs of both leader and
follower, we would say that Hitler led. His many followers in Ger-
many shared his goals. He was not simply forcing his sentiments and
views on everyone. He reached office, in part, by articulating the
pains and hopes of many people.
   Furthermore, by the standard of organizational effectiveness,
24   I   SETTING THE FRAME

Hitler exercised formidable leadership. Within hundreds of specific
decisionmaking instances, Hitler succeeded in developing the effec-
tiveness of German organizations. He set the goal of restoring the
German economy, and for a period of time he succeeded.
   If we assume that leadership must not only meet the needs of
followers but also must elevate them, we render a different judgment.
Hitler wielded power, but he did not lead. 44 He played to people's
basest needs and fears. If he inspired people toward the common
good of Germany, it was the good of a truncated and exclusive
society feeding off others. By the standard of legitimate authority,
Hitler also does not qualify as a leader. Elected once by a plurality
of Germans in 1933, he destroyed the nascent democratic political
apparatus and maintained his political dominance through terror.
   By the criterion of adaptive work used here, we would also say
that Hitler failed to exercise leadership. Although dramatically mo-
bilizing his society, both socially and economically, he did so primar-
ily in the direction of avoiding tough realities. By providing illusions
of grandeur, internal scapegoats, and external enemies, Hitler misdi-
agnosed Germany's ills and brought his nation to disaster. 45 He
exercised leadership no more than a charlatan practices medicine
when providing fake remedies. 46
   There are several advantages to viewing leadership in terms of
adaptive work. First, it points to the pivotal importance of reality
testing in producing socially useful outcomes-the process of weigh-
ing one interpretation of a problem and its sources of evidence
against others. Without this process, problem definitions fail to
model the situation causing distress. 47 Conceptions of leadership that
do not value reality testing encourage people to realize their vision,
however faulty their sight. Thus, Hitler's error was diagnostic as well
as mora1. 48 To produce adaptive work, a vision must track the con-
tours of reality; it has to have accuracy, and not simply imagination
and appea1. 49
   In addition, focusing on adaptive work allows us to evaluate
leadership in process rather than wait until the outcome is clear. We
could have spotted Hitler's faulty reality testing early on. He gave
plenty of clues. His election in 1933 based on a platform of exalta-
tion and scapegoating would have made us question the health of
the problem-solving apparatus in the German society, notwithstand-
                                           Values in Leadership / 25

ing the appearance of legitimate authority flowing from a democratic
election. We would not have had to wait for the results of his efforts.
   Furthermore, in using the criterion of adaptive work, we need not
impose our own hierarchy of human needs on the genuinely ex-
pressed needs of Germany at the time. In analyzing a community's
response to hard realities, we would ask the following questions: Are
its members testing their views of the problem against competing
views within the community or are they defensively sticking to a
particular perspective and suppressing others? Are people testing
seriously the relationship between means and ends? Are conflicts
over values and the morality of various means open to examination?
Are policies analyzed and evaluated to distinguish fact from fiction?
   In Nazi Germany, Hitler suppressed the competition among Ger-
man perspectives. He established a norm of conformity that excluded
the views that could test his vision of Germany's problems. Hence,
Germany could not test the hypothetical relationship between cur-
rent economic conditions and the citizenship of Jews. 50 How estab-
lishing a "land free of Jews" would restore Germany was not subject
to open scrutiny, either as a technical or moral prescription. Even in
military operations, German policymakers lost the flexibility to re-
spond to changed conditions. The ideal of will produced decisions
that disregarded complex circumstances.
   Working within the society's own frame of reference becomes
particularly important in cases less obvious than Nazi Germany. For
example, an international development consultant might plan a se-
ries of interventions into a foreign culture. To assess that culture's
objectives according to her own values may be dangerous. But she
can help assess the quality of work without imposing her beliefs. She
can evaluate the extent to which the culture fails to address the
problems arising from the culture's own values and purposes. And
perhaps more significantly if she has any leverage, she may be able
to help or push the society to do the hard work of clarifying its
competing values and purposes, and of facing the painful trade-offs
and adjustments required to narrow the gap between current condi-
tions and purposes. If the society bans certain parties, disenfranchises
segments of the population, or uses torture and repression, what
value perspective is obliterated among those being silenced? What
aspects of reality that they see are being kept hidden? What might
26   I   SETTING THE FRAME

she do to encourage the factions of the culture to speed their own
change of attitudes, habits, and beliefs?
   Because leadership affects many lives, the concept we use must be
spacious. It has to allow for the values of various cultures and
organizations. It cannot be imperialistic. Yet we cannot beg the issue
altogether by saying that leadership is value-free and define it simply
in terms of its instruments (influence, formal powers, prominence)
or personal resources (skills, bearing, temperament). Those who
listen to us do more with what we say. They turn instruments and
resources into values that orient their professional lives.
   In this study, leadership is oriented by the task of doing adaptive
work. As we shall see, influence and authority are primary factors
in doing adaptive work, but they also bring constraints. They are
instruments and not ends. Tackling tough problems-problems that
often require an evolution of values-is the end of leadership; getting
that work done is its essence.
   Our societies and organizations clearly need leadership in the sense
developed here. We are facing major adaptive challenges. We need a
view of leadership that provides a practical orientation so that we
can evaluate events and action in process, without waiting for out-
comes. We also need a governor on our tendencies to become arro-
gant and grandiose in our visions, to flee from harsh realities and
the dailyness of leadership. Terms like transformational leadership
fuel such grandiosity. Furthermore, as we shall see, a strategy of
leadership to accomplish adaptive work accounts for several condi-
tions and values that are consonant with the demands of a demo-
cratic society. In addition to reality testing, these include respecting
conflict, negotiation, and a diversity of views within a community;
increasing community cohesion; developing norms of responsibility-
taking, learning, and innovation; and keeping social distress within
a bearable range.
   Yet this concept of leadership has potential drawbacks that require
investigation. The word adaptation too readily connotes coping, as
if one must passively submit to an unbending reality. It may often
be true that there are unbending realities that we should face rather
than avoid, but since much of social reality is a product of social
arrangements, and physical reality has become increasingly amenable
to technological impact, there is obviously a great deal of plasticity
                                        Values in Leadership I 27

to many of our realities, and we would do ourselves a disservice to
adopt a coping relationship to them. 51 In addition, because adapta-
tion is a metaphor from biology where the objective is survival,
leadership as "activity to mobilize adaptation" may connote an
overemphasis on survival. Clearly, we have a host of quite precious
values-liberty, equality, human welfare, justice, and community-
for which we take risks, and a concept of adaptation applied to
human organizations and societies must account for these squarely.
With these concerns in mind, we turn to a deeper examination of
adaptive work.
                                2
              To Lead or Mislead?


Living systems seek equilibrium. They respond to stress by working
to regain balance. 1 If the human body becomes infected by bacteria,
the system responds to fight off the infection and restore health.
When people walk outdoors on a hot summer day, they sweat and
move slowly to maintain a constant internal temperature of 98.6
degrees Fahrenheit. When a fire burns down a forest, the seeds that
routinely blow in from a distance now take root in the ash. Knocked
out of equilibrium, living systems summon a set of restorative re-
sponses. 2
   These responses to disequilibrium are the product of evolutionary
adaptations that transformed into routine problems what were once
nearly overwhelming threats. Looking backward in time, we marvel
at the abundant success of these adaptations and the breadth of
exploited opportunities. Yet we tend to notice the successes and
innovations more than the failures. By definition, the successes sur-
vive while the failures disappear. The roads of evolution are strewn
with the bones of creatures that could not thrive in the next envi-
ronment. In natural selection, the failures abound alongside the
successes. Evolution works by trial and error. 3
   Developing a robust adaptation to a new challenge is, in a sense,
a learning process for a species. Through the hit-or-miss survival of
some individuals over others, a species makes its way toward new
adaptive capacities. As the survivors pass on to their offspring the
traits that gave them a slight edge in the competition for resources,
                                 28
                                           To Lead OT Mislead?    / 29

these better-adapted capacities become "hardwired" into the genetic
programs of the species; the gene pool that determines the anatomi-
cal features and refinements of the next generation becomes changed.
For example, human beings have developed the ability to speak in
words and invent complex languages. These developments occurred
because of new genetic recombinations and random mutations that
happened to enhance the survival and reproductive capacity of our
ancestors. These features have now become part of our inheritance.
   Nature, however, is not farsighted. In fact, it has no foresight at
all. Biological adaptation is not the result of planning or design on
the part of a species, but is merely the outcome when some individual
happens to be born with a trait that equips it to survive and repro-
duce in a changed environment. This variation is usually the result
of a genetic "accident"-a mutation-and is often detrimental to the
individual. But when the environment changes, the variation that
might have been a disadvantage in the previous environment can
suddenly present a distinct advantage.
   For example, in England prior to the industrial revolution, most
peppered moths were light-colored, resembling the heavy growths of
pale-colored lichens that covered the tree trunks where they lived.
Their light coloring protected the moths from their predators
through camouflage. But during the industrial revolution, tree trunks
in heavily industrialized parts of England became bare because pol-
luting gases killed the lichens. The exposed dark trunks no longer
provided camouflage for lighter moths, which were eaten by birds,
but now protected the few darker variants. These better-adapted
individuals survived and reproduced, thus pushing the local popula-
tion toward gradual adaptive change. In nonindustrialized areas, the
lighter-colored moths continued to thrive as before. 4
   Of course, if a species adapts to its current challenge, it still may
not overcome the next one. Natural selection improvises, and impro-
vises again, without any vision of what problems it might face ahead.
   As amazing as it may seem that variation and natural selection
have created red flowers, trees bearing pine cones, birds that sing, or
camels, it seems just as extraordinary that adaptive processes have
produced human beings with the capacity to learn. Because our
genetic hardwiring gives us both social predispositions and intelli-
gence, we humans can invent, reflect, and develop complex social
30   I   SETTING THE FRAME

systems that carry the lessons of our past. s We can thrive in cold
climates because we have learned to clothe, shelter, and organize our
communities, and pass on the know-how to our progeny.
   Not only can we learn, but we can also manage our learning. We
create rich cultures that pass on both what we know and how to
discover more. We can give to others all sorts of lessons not in our
genes. Nature has endowed us with the capacity to reflect on our
problems and change our responses to them. Thus, Moses spent only
two generations transforming an abject people into a self-governing
society capable of fashioning laws that transcended the rule of kings. 6
Humanity has taken only 10,000 years to go from living as hunters
and gatherers in well-circumscribed areas to developing a global
economy and inventing the institutions and technologies that make
it possible. We have new aspirations that generate new sets of op-
portunities and problems. Not only do we have vision, but we have
the ability to analyze what we see. We can even temper our visions.
   Yet many societies in human history have died rather than adapt.
Clarifying aspirations, facing problems, and developing a set of so-
cially adaptive responses is not easy. Just as individuals resist the pain
and dislocation that comes with changing their attitudes and habits
of behavior, societies resist learning as well. For a social system to
learn, old patterns of relationship-balances of power, customary
operating procedures, distributions of wealth-may be threatened.
Old skills may be rendered useless. Beliefs, identity, and orienting
values-images of justice, community, and responsibility-may be
called into question. Humans can learn and cultures can change, but
how much and how fast?



                            Adaptive Work
The concept of adaptation arises from efforts to understand biologi-
cal evolution. Applied to the change of cultures and societies, the
concept becomes a useful, if inexact, metaphor. Species change as the
genetic program changes; cultures change by learning.? Evolution is
a matter of chance-a fortuitous fit between random variation and
new environmental pressures; societies, by contrast, can respond to
new pressures with deliberation and planning. Evolution has no
                                           To Lead or Mislead?   / 31

"purpose"-survival is our only measure of its success; societies
generate purposes beyond survival.
   The first and second differences between biological and cultural
adaptation seem to pose little conceptual difficulty. We know intui-
tively that communities change through a variety of learning proc-
esses and sometimes with foresight and planning. This last difference,
however, requires a refashioning of the metaphor if we are to use it
to describe social change. The concept of adaptation applied to
culture raises the question: Adapt to what, for what purpose?
   In biology, survival of individual members of a species and their
gene-carrying kin basically define the direction in which the species
adapts. A situation becomes a "problem" for the species, or more
accurately an adaptive challenge, because it threatens the capacity of
individuals to pass on their genetic heritage.
   Adapting to human challenges requires that we go beyond the
requirements of simply surviving. In human societies, adaptive work
consists of efforts to close the gap between reality and a host of
values not restricted to survival. We perceive problems whenever
circumstances do not conform to the way we think things ought to
be. Thus, adaptive work involves not only the assessment of reality
but also the clarification of values.
   These tasks are inextricably connected. Assessing circumstances is
made complex because we cannot always define problems objec-
tively. The methods of science make a major contribution to reality
testing; yet they cannot reliably define our problems both because
the scientific metho'd has limited capacity to make predictions and
because our problems can only be diagnosed in light of our values.
With different values, we screen reality for different information and
put the facts together into a different picture. 8 If a society values
individual freedom, it will tend to highlight those aspects of reality
that challenge freedom. And as a corollary, it will also be inclined to
neglect those elements of reality upon which another society with
another central value, like shared responsibility, will focus. The as-
pect of truth each sees depends significantly on who cares about
what. 9
   Typically, a social system will honor some mix of values, and the
competition within this mix largely explains why adaptive work so
often involves conflict. People with competing values engage one
32   I   SETTING THE FRAME

another as they confront a shared situation from their own points
of view. At its extreme, and in the absence of better methods of social
change, the conflict over values can be violent. The Civil War
changed the meaning of union and individual freedom.
   Some realities will threaten the very existence of a society if not
discovered and met early on by the value-clarifying and reality-test-
ing functions of the society. In the view of many environmentalists,
our focus on the production of wealth rather than coexistence with
nature has led us to neglect fragile factors in our ecosystem. These
factors may become relevant to us when finally they begin to chal-
lenge our central values of health and survival, but by then we may
have paid a high price in damage already done, and the costs of
adaptive adjustment may have increased enormously.
   Consider the following story. Pifteen hundred years ago, a group
of Polynesians migrated over one thousand miles across the ocean
to discover and settle on Easter Island. 10 They found a land rich with
palm forests but far less fertile for cultivation than the islands back
home. Not only the land but the sea as well had limited resources.
Without a reef barrier, offshore waters provided a marginal fishing
environment. II Yet the settlers apparently developed the island in
familiar ways, applying and varying the strategies already in their
repertoire. The abundance of palm trees provided everything from
clothing to shelter and boats, and so the islanders thrived. To safe-
guard their venture, they built extraordinary stone figures to honor
the gods.
   For one thousand years the settlers grew and prospered according
to their ancient ways. Adaptation meant variations on known meth-
ods. Although maintaining their slash and burn modes of agriculture,
they adapted their farming to the new environment by building
walled structures, "manavai," and using craters to protect trees and
plants from the winds. But as their population grew and the number
of trees began to dwindle, they created a situation that their reper-
toire of responses could not master.
   The beliefs that once played a central role in a robust society
became impediments to further adaptation. The islanders built more
elaborate places of worship and even grander stone figures. When
honoring the gods did not succeed in renewing scarce resources,
some religious observances became extreme. The "Birdman" cult,
oriented perhaps by the idea that the powerful Pacific frigate bird
                                           To Lead or Mislead?   / 33

might intercede with the spirits, became a dominant political force.
The hereditary chief and the priests lost a measure of their authority.
Huge statues, weighing up to fifty metric tons, were built and then
toppled and decapitated to release their divine powers, their mana.
   When nothing else seemed to work, people resorted to human
sacrifice and cannibalism. Finally, clannish factionalism and the rise
of strongmen in the two major communities on the island led to war
and destruction. The people began to starve. When Dutch sailors
arrived at the island on Easter day, 1722, the trees were gone. The
few remaining islanders found no blessing in their "discovery" by
Europeans. Men were sold into slavery, women were taken as mis-
tresses, and small pox raged. Only a handful of people endured to
pass on their language and legends.
   With a perfect science of forecasting and with a perfectly adaptive
social system, people would be able to foresee crucial new realities
and make the necessary adjustments. Even divergent cultural values
could be subsumed by the shared value of survival. But we have
neither perfect science nor perfect adaptability. The presumed demise
of Easter Island culture suggests, among other things, that the ability
to adapt requires the productive interaction of different values
through which each member or faction in a society sees reality and
its challenges. Without conflicting frames of reference, the social
system scrutinizes only limited features of its problematic environ-
ment. It operates at the mercy of its blind spots because it cannot
prepare for what it does not see. The Easter Islanders valued their
relationship with the divine spirits and assumed that the gods would
adjust nature to their needs. In particular, the fertility of the land
was thought to depend upon interactions between divine power and
the hereditary chief. However, had the islanders also placed value on
their direct relationship with nature, for example, they might have
sensed the slow but growing changes in their relationship with natu-
ral resources, and adjusted accordingly.
   Let's imagine that early in the decline of Easter Island a small
group saw that the trees were the island's true source of sustenance.
Suppose in their zeal, they began to admonish people to stop cutting
them down. Vociferously, they brought the problem of diminishing
trees to general attention and came into conflict with the values and
habits of their neighbors, as well as the authority structure.
   The traditionalists, however, interpreting the situation according
34   /   SETTING THE FRAME

to their old values, saw the diminishing resources as a problem in
their relationship with the gods. So they built bigger and bigger
statues to the divine spirits, occasionally feminizing them with
breasts to promote the land's fertility and adding bird figures to some
of them. 12 They saw no way to reconcile their view with the view of
the tree zealots. Dominant in political and military power, they
silenced the heretics.
   From our perspective outside the system and with our knowledge,
it is easy for us to see that both factions had a grasp of some critical
dimensions of reality. The traditional view encompassed all those
institutions, habits, common currencies, and values which had built
the society. This view had adapted wonderfully in many ways to its
environment, and it enriched people's spiritual and social lives; surely
a sensible tree policy would not require turning all of those norms
upside down. 13 The new view, however, encompassed an emerging
reality that, if left unaccounted for, would lead to the destruction of
everything else that was good on the island.
   In this case, adaptive work would mean utilizing both traditional
values and the values represented by those who recognized the soci-
ety's direct dependency on natural resources. Each would have to
learn from the other. Learning would require each party to interpret
the problem somewhat differently. The traditionalists would have to
amend their interpretive framework-their religious under-
standing-to encompass the emerging evidence that the fertility of
trees depended on the relationship not only between people and the
gods but between people and trees. On the other hand, the zealots
would have to accommodate their views to incorporate the long-
standing evidence that the society depended on tree cutting to sustain
its ways. It could not just stop cutting trees down.
   Archaeologists do not yet know if the islanders were beginning to
conserve and plant trees by the time of their demise. To be effective,
trees would have to be grown at the same rate that they were being
cut down or the crisis would merely be postponed. Indeed, to adapt,
the islanders would have had to solve a variety of problems in
addition to the farming of trees, such as population control and
migration to distant shores. Progress on these, too, may have re-
quired the creativity generated by differences, but the story has been
made simple to illustrate a point: the mix of values in a society
                                           To Lead OT Mislead?    I   35

provides multiple vantage points from which to view reality. Conflict
and heterogeneity are resources for social learning. Although people
may not come to share one another's values, they may learn vital
information that would ordinarily be lost to view without engaging
the perspectives of those who challenge them.
   If we define problems by the disparity between values and circum-
stances, then an adaptive challenge is a particular kind of problem
where the gap cannot be closed by the application of current tech-
nical know-how or routine behavior. To make progress, not only
must invention and action change circumstances to align reality with
values, but the values themselves may also have to change. Leader-
ship will consist not of answers or assured visions but of taking
action to clarify values. It asks questions like: What are we missing
here? Are there values of competing groups that we suppress rather
than apply to our understanding of the problem at hand? Are there
shared values that might enable us to engage competing views?
Ongoing adaptive capacity requires a rich and evolving mix of values
to inform a society's process of reality testing. It requires leadership
to fire and contain the forces of invention and change, and to extract
the next step.

                      Disequilibrium Dynamics
Like living systems, social systems under threat try to restore equi-
librium. Generally, equilibrium means stability in which the levels of
stress within the political, social, and economic areas of the society
are not increasing. 14 Yet there is nothing ideal or good about a state
of equilibrium per see Indeed, achieving adaptive change probably
requires sustained periods of disequilibrium. IS A society may operate
without increasing levels of stress, quite oblivious to the bankruptcy
that lies ahead. Without a general climate of urgency-the feeling
that something must change-the society may do nothing until it is
too late. 16 How to manage sustained periods of stress consequently
poses a central question for the exercise of leadership.
   The patterns of disequilibrium in a social system take three forms.
First, the current problem presents no new challenge and a response
from the current repertoire may restore equilibrium successfully. For
example, when snow blocks an interstate highway passing through
36   /   SETTING THE FRAME

the mountains and generates momentary distress to drivers, highway
snow clearing services remove the snow and restore traffic to a slow
but steady level. The social system, experienced in the problem, has
learned a set of responses to meet the challenge. The problem and
its solution lie within the society's repertoire.
   Second, when the society has no ready solution for the situation,
the social system may still try to apply responses from its repertoire,
but may only restore equilibrium in the short term and at the cost
of long-term consequences. This may have been the case with the
demise of the Easter Island civilization.
   Third, the society may learn to meet the new challenge. First Meiji
japan and recently postwar japan made numerous adjustments to
political balances of power, mechanisms to distribute wealth, atti-
tudes to foreign industrial know-how, skills for its labor force, and
cultural values and norms. Although the 1990s reveal significant
problems, japanese society has adapted remarkably. Indeed, in the
process of adapting, Japanese society seems self-consciously to have
learned lessons about how to continue managing the adaptive proc-
ess. Perhaps japan's competitive edge consists of consciously insisting
that it must learn. 17
   Thus, there are three basic possibilities. The current response may
both restore equilibrium quickly and solve the problem. The current
response may restore equilibrium in the short term through a variety
of expedient measures but may not solve the underlying problem.
Overwhelmed eventually by the challenge, the society may retreat to
a constricted level of functioning or die. Finally, the current response
cannot solve the problem, but the social system may mobilize to
produce a new adaptation sufficient to meet the challenge.
   Clearly, we are interested in knowing how to turn the second
possibility into the third outcome. Our organizations and societies
face many kinds of adaptive work that we cannot afford to avoid.
Some problems, such as reviving competitiveness in international
markets, require that the United States respond to changed circum-
stances, urgent issues, and creative opportunities. The renewal of
ethnic strife in the destabilized post-cold war international system
requires the invention of new methods for dealing with festering
problems of racial enmity. The simultaneous increases in crime,
prison population, and prevalence of drugs in the streets of the
                                           To Lead OT Mislead?    / 37

United States require serious differentiation of fact from fiction and
close reasoning about causes and effects. Clashes between the pro-
choice and pro-life forces in the abortion debate demonstrate an
inability to resolve conflicts in human values peacefully even when
the parties have little economic interest. The United States continues
to consume natural resources at a rate that does not recognize limits
or live within them. Too often we fail to meet these kinds of chal-
lenge. Why is this so?
   People fail to adapt for several reasons. In some cases they may
misperceive the nature of the threat. Based on their experience and
science, the people of Pompeii made a reasonable but tragic estimate
of the risk that Vesuvius might erupt. In our age, we are fortunate
to have discovered already our dependence on the ozone layer. In
addition to threats within common knowledge, however, some
threats remain to be discovered. People can respond only to those
threats that they see.
   In some other cases the society may perceive the threat, but the
challenge may exceed the culture's adaptive capability. Innumerable
human tribes and organizations have disappeared with the onslaught
of disease, environmental challenge, invasion, or competition be-
cause they could not develop the ability or find the means to adjust
appropriately.
   Finally, people fail to adapt because of the distress provoked by
the problem and the changes it demands. They resist the pain, anxi-
ety, or conflict that accompanies a sustained interaction with the
situation. Holding onto past assumptions, blaming authority, scape-
goating, externalizing the enemy, denying the problem, jumping to
conclusions, or finding a distracting issue may restore stability and
feel less stressful than facing and taking responsibility for a complex
challenge. These patterns of response to disequilibrium are called
work avoidance mechanisms in this study, and they are similar to
the defensive routines that operate in individuals, small groups, and
organizations. 18
   Diagnostically, an organization or community may experience any
one of these difficulties in adapting. But when one takes action, the
final cause of adaptive failure-the tendency to avoid distress-holds
the key to setting strategy. It frequently provides the ultimate impedi-
ment to adaptive change because the learning associated with iden-
38   I   SETTING THE FRAME

tifying blind spots and options that others cannot see, or strength-
ening a community's problem-solving capacity, will generate conflict
and distress. Thus, a key question for leadership becomes: How can
one counteract the expected work avoidances and help people learn
despite resistance?
   Though differing in form depending on the culture and complexity
of the social system, work avoidance mechanisms seem to operate in
any social context. In a small group, less powerful members will sit
back and "watch the gladiators fight" as the chairperson and a
colleague who represents a challenging perspective engage in an
angry exchange that diverts attention from the issues on the table
and diminishes a sense of shared responsibility. In an organization,
people will follow standard operating procedures even when they
know the procedures do not fit the situation. In a community or
nation, voters will choose "good news" candidates even when they
suspect that progress on pressing problems will require hard adjust-
ments on their part.
   Yet though we frequently avoid adaptive work, we seldom do so
deliberately. Work avoidance mechanisms are often unconscious, or
at least disguised from the self. Sometimes they reflect comforting
misdiagnoses of the situation-a social system may scapegoat one of
its factions because of a dominant perception that the faction is
indeed responsible for the problem. A mob that burns a man in effigy
may believe that its problem would be solved if it could burn the
man himself. Yet even killing an accused heretic like Salman Rushdie
would do little to integrate the traditional and modern strains within
Islamic societies. Nevertheless, people in motion striving to ease their
struggle may wish to believe that getting the scapegoat provides the
needed resolution.
   Reality testing-the effort to grasp the problem fully-is often an
early victim of disequilibrium. Initially, people will apply routine
practices for realistically assessing and addressing problems. But if
these do not pay early dividends, restoring equilibrium may take
precedence over the prolonged uncertainty associated with weighing
divergent views and facing the need for changing attitudes and be-
liefs. With sustained distress, people may lose sight of their purposes.
They "take their eyes off the ball."
   On a personal level, for example, consider a father's response to
                                           To Lead or Mislead?    I 39

the continued irritability and crying of his child. At first the father
reacts with care and curiosity, questioning the child to assess the
source of frustration. Not succeeding, the father may jump to a
solution (like offering the child food), even though he doesn't under-
stand the problem. If that does not work, the father might try to
impose the solution authoritatively (strongly urging the child to eat).
By the time that fails, the father begins to feel quite frustrated
himself. The child's sense of urgency has now rubbed off on the
father. If the father has a large capacity to tolerate frustration, he
may start over again; he may continue to test reality. He may calm
himself and then ask more questions to determine the difficulty. On
the other hand, if the father has reached his own limit of tolerance,
he may instead begin to grasp whatever mechanism he has in his
repertoire for alleviating tension, at the cost of continuing to explore
various causes of the child's problem. For example, he may put the
child in his room and close the door to avoid the crying, or he may
hit the child. As the father begins to view distress as the problem
rather than as a symptom, his aim and focus of attention change as
well. He shifts unconsciously to reducing the distress per se, and in
that effort avoids the work of figuring out what's wrong with the
child, and what would be an adaptive response. 19
   Distinguishing work from work avoidance is no science. Each
culture will have its own typical patterns of response to stress-
work-producing as well as work-avoiding. While more research
should clarify the distinction between productive and avoidance be-
haviors in different social systems, some rules of thumb are useful.
One might detect work avoidance when the subject of discussion is
suddenly taken off the table (as with diversions); when the level of
stress associated with an issue suddenly drops (often following an
apparent technical fix); when the focus shifts from attending to the
problem itself to alleviating the symptoms of stress (as in the father's
case above); or when responsibility for the problem is displaced to
an easy target (as with scapegoating). One ought to take a skeptical
stance, at least momentarily, when some action suddenly makes
everybody feel good.
   Of course, what looks like momentary periods of work avoidance
from one vantage point may be part of someone else's strategy.
Leadership often requires pacing the work in an effort to prepare
40     /   SETTING THE FRAME


people to undertake a hard task at a rate they can stand. At the
moment of his speech during the Los Angeles riots, one could not
know whether George Bush was leading the nation or fostering work
avoidance. Even his previous patterns of behavior could not tell us
with certainty because a President's political calculations change with
circumstances as public opinion shifts. To judge, we would have to
look at his next moves after restoring equilibrium. Did he use the
event soon afterwards to mobilize people to tackle the complex
issues that gave rise to the riots, or did he move on to issues less
challenging to the nation and his candidacy for reelection? We can-
not know what Bush would have done in a second term as President,
but in his remaining nine months in office, he seemed by and large
to beg the issue and let the nation off the hook.
   The following case illustrates the dynamics of disequilibrium and
work avoidance with a little more historical distance.


                      The Strategic Defense Initiative
On March 23, 1983, President Ronald Reagan announced a bold
new plan to develop a technological shield that would protect the
United States from nuclear attack. The Strategic Defense Initiative
(SDI-eommonly called "Star Wars") intended to make nuclear
weapons "impotent and obsolete. "20
   Ronald Reagan's interest in an effective nuclear defense dated back
at least to his days as Governor of California, when he toured the
Livermore Labs guided by scientist Edward Teller. Later, in his presi-
dential challenge to Gerald Ford in 1976, he criticized deterrence,
"comparing it to two people with guns cocked at each other's
head."21 During his 1980 presidential campaign, he made this wish-
ful reference to a nuclear defense:

     They actually are tracking several thousand objects in space . . . I
     think the thing that struck me was the irony that here, with this great
     technology of ours, we can do all of this, yet we cannot stop any of
     the weapons that are coming at us. I don't think there's been a time
     in history when there wasn't a defense against some kind of thrust,
     even back in the old-fashioned days when we had coast artillery that
     would stop invading ships.22
                                           To Lead or Mislead?    I   41

   Like many Presidents, Reagan wanted to do a great deal more than
had been done to defend his country, and some scientists, especially
Teller, told him that a great deal more could be done. Troubled by
what he saw as America's vulnerability to people in Moscow, yet
with little if any input from his advisers in the Defense and State
Departments, he embarked on SDI.23 He presented it as a way of
ensuring that the nation's security would no longer hinge on the
threat of retaliation to nuclear attack. The United States would
render itself invulnerable to attack in the first place, Reagan claimed:
we would go from Mutually Assured Destruction to Mutually As-
sured Survival.
   The solution offered by President Reagan-SDI-reflected the way
he defined the problem of defense in the nuclear age. The President,
Teller, and a few others saw the problem in terms of our vulnerability
to attack. Should we be held hostage to any foreign power, let alone
an uncontrollable and "evil empire"? Was the threat of retaliation
sufficient to combat the workings of a fundamentally aggressive and
deceitful Soviet Union? Reagan said no. 24
   Within the foreign policy establishment, however, there were
strong competing views. Most arms control experts defined the prob-
lem not in terms of vulnerability per se but as the imbalance of
vulnerability between the superpowers. 25 Security lay in mutual vul-
nerability. As long as neither side gained a significant advantage over
the other, neither power would risk a nuclear war. Within this school
of thought, one camp strongly favored further arms control agree-
ments that would slow the nuclear arms race and create greater
deterrent stability. Another camp felt the United States had given too
much away to the Soviets already in previous arms control treaties,
perceived a "window of vulnerability" through which the Soviets
could conceivably launch a first-strike knock-out blow, and saw SDI
as a way to defend American forces and deter any "optimistic" Soviet
calculation that a first strike could succeed.
   Significantly, there was common ground between these views.
Nearly everyone agreed that even at the very best SDI would render
the country invulnerable only to ballistic missiles and not to subma-
rine-launched cruise missiles with nuclear warheads or planes carry-
ing nuclear bombs and missiles. 26 In addition, SDI would not protect
the United States from chemical or biological weapons carried by
42   I   SETTING THE FRAME


nonballistic means. There would be all sorts of ways our enemies
could get us, despite SDI.
   In other words, most policymakers and experts agreed that SDI
was being vastly oversold as a space shield. Given even the most
optimistic forecasts, SDI would fail to address the problem defined
by President Reagan. The United States would remain vulnerable.
   How then can we explain the President's initiative and his cam-
paign to sell SDI to the public? Most of his advisers knew better.
They saw SDI not as a panacea for vulnerability but either as a
bargaining chip in arms control negotiations or as a means of pro-
tecting our own missile silos and thus strengthening our deterrent
capability. They realized, however, that Reagan's view of SDI as a
solution to deterrence was much more marketable. 27
   The President's advisers knew that the public would not buy SDI
as a bargaining ploy or another weapons system; the costs were
astronomical. Indeed, in early 1983 the nuclear freeze movement was
gaining considerable popular momentum, and even the Catholic
bishops-always stalwart anticommunists-were publicly question-
ing in a Pastoral Letter the morality of nuclear deterrence. 28 The
nuclear issue had taken on a feeling of urgency. To disarm these
opponents and restore equilibrium required exaggerating the poten-
tial benefits of SDI, suggesting that it might some day eliminate
nuclear weapons altogether. Since Reagan felt passionately about the
possibility of building an impenetrable shield, presenting it to the
public this way was relatively easy.29 Indeed, if the President's vision
was fraught with internal contradictions, he seemed not to notice. 30
   The wishful thinking that apparently underlay the President's be-
lief in SDI shaped a highly effective political campaign that looked
like leadership, as it is most commonly conceived. With one bold
stroke, Reagan dominated doves and moralists by staking a position
that co-opted both. Who could argue with the goal of abolishing
nuclear weapons altogether? Who could argue with the morality of
a defensive strategy over Mutually Assured Destruction? In one short
speech, Reagan took control of the public debate and recast it in his
own terms. If leadership means getting people to rally behind one's
own vision, then SDI is a case par excellence. Reagan came up with
a vision that spoke to the hearts of millions of people who were
willing to invest billions of dollars in its achievement. He had the
vision, and he had the political skill to market it.
                                            To Lead or Mislead?   /   43

    But was this leadership? If leadership turns on getting people to
 do adaptive work, then leadership begins with facing tough realities.
 Three questions ensue: For what tough reality was SOl a response?
 What beliefs, investments, and values would be threatened by facing
 that reality? And was SDI an adaptive response?
    The tough reality was staggering, mutual vulnerability to nuclear
 attack. Reagan would not accept it. Although the United States had
 lived for more than thirty years in a state of mutual vulnerability, he
 apparently had never given up the "old-fashioned" view that U.S.
 national security should never depend on the wisdom, predictability,
 or sanity of adversaries. Mutual vulnerability as a defense relied
 much too much on the other side.
    The reality of mutual vulnerability is not easy news to take. For
thousands of years human beings have sought to protect themselves
by constructing invulnerable defenses. Oceans, walls, moats, and
mountains have protected communities from hostile neighbors.
Sometimes these were breached, but often they remained inviolate.
Only the advent of nuclear weapons in 1945 made our security
absolutely contingent upon our capacity to manage relationships of
vulnerability with other nuclear powers. No longer could anyone
even hope to be "king of the mountain." No longer could our
governments or tribal councils guarantee our safety from attack. The
idea of nuclear deterrence-that vulnerability is desirable, as op-
posed to being simply unavoidable-shifted radically our conception
of security. Security became a function of relating, more than isola-
tion. 31
    Incorporating the tough reality of mutual vulnerability meant at
least three major adjustments for Americans. First, our ethos of
self-reliance had to be tempered by the reality of interdependence.
With oceans separating us from our adversaries, Americans had
virtually no experience with vulnerability prior to the Soviet Union's
development of the atomic bomb. In contrast, most of the countries
in Europe had been overrun by one neighbor or another many times
in the last several hundred years. 32
    Furthermore, in a world of mutual vulnerability, we would have
to relate differently to our enemies. If nuclear deterrence violates our
moral sensibilities, then our only recourse is to pursue less dangerous
relationships, even to transform them. For lessons in how this can
work we have current history to draw upon. Although the British
44   /   SETTING THE FRAME

and French have enough nuclear weapons to decimate the United
States, and each other, we do not fear them; neither do they fear
each other. These relationships, although mutually vulnerable, con-
sist of a sufficient set of mutual identifications, joint purposes, and
rules of conduct to ensure mutual safety.
   Hence, mutual trust often must be fashioned by shared enterprise
and effort. Yet as President Nixon found in 1973 when he attempted
to develop detente, creating a set of conditions for improved rela-
tions with the Soviets ran against the grain of Americans, who not
only had been raised to view the Soviet Union as a godless, sinister
place but also, for two generations, had sacrificed their lives and
families to fight Soviet influence in Korea, in Vietnam, and in various
skirmishes for client states and factions. 33
   Finally, facing mutual vulnerability would demand taking respon-
sibility for America's role in producing bad outcomes. Managing an
interdependent relationship requires accounting for one's own be-
havior in assessing the behavior of the other party.34 Did we provoke
or perpetuate Soviet hostility? For example, in a 1989 round of
dialogues between the Soviet and American officials who had been
centrally involved with the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, the American
side learned that a key factor in the Soviet decision to ship nuclear
missiles to Cuba was the perception that the United States planned
eventually to invade Cuba and overthrow Castro. The officials in the
Kennedy Administration, however, were far more aware of the re-
straint they had shown in both the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba
eighteen months before and subsequent more subtle acts to desta-
bilize the Castro regime. The connection between the Bay of Pigs
attack and Soviet missiles in Cuba was by and large unseen by the
Kennedy Administration. 35 Their assessment of Soviet motives in
placing missiles in Cuba failed to appreciate the significance of their
own role in provoking Soviet action.
   SDI, then, can be viewed as a response to the distress generated
by the stark reality of being vulnerable to nuclear annihilation. 36
Facing that reality involved major adjustments in public perspectives.
Politically, the conflict over which of these adjustments the country
should make surfaced in the Nuclear Freeze Movement, the Catholic
Bishops Letter, and a strong conservative sentiment to refortify the
military. After thirty years of festering, the strains within the nation
                                            To Lead or Mislead? /     45

as it struggled with the meaning of mutual vulnerability took on the
feel of urgency. Given the responsibilities of his office, the President
would have felt the urgency acutely, as well as the need to fashion a
strong response.
   Was Reagan's response adaptive? The answer may vary depending
on the time-frame for analysis. Although some responses may sac-
rifice long-term progress for short-term equanimity, still short-term
equanimity may provide a necessary footing for future progress. In
retrospect, we can j~dge the robustness of President Reagan's re-
sponse by examining how well our society has continued to function,
that is, to refine and meet our aspirations. We can also analyze the
effects of SDI on the system of international relations. But in the
early 1990s, it is too early to know. On one hand, the current
transformation of the former Soviet Union and Central and Eastern
Europe can be seen partly as a product of the Reagan Administra-
tion's hard line on arms control, including SDI. The Soviets were
forced to face their economic incapacity to keep up. On the other
hand, one could argue that these transformations were largely the
product of a host of internal processes of collapse. Rather than
respond to the adaptive efforts in the Soviet Union, Reagan's policies
made it ever more difficult for the United States to assist the Soviet
transformation. Public backing for a flexible relationship with the
Soviet Union had never been fostered, and the legacy of debt result-
ing from the huge costs of an expanded defense in the face of tax
cuts created severe limitations on our economic capacity for assis-
tance in the 1990s.
   What counts to those who lead, however, is not retrospect but
judgments made in process. In real time, we might predict the adap-
tive success of a policy by the following commonsense principle: an
initiative that addresses the challenge facing the society is more likely
to result in a robust adaptation than a response that avoids address-
ing the challenge. Was Reagan facing the hard, new reality?
   Some people might say that SOl provided a bold new means to
tackle the challenge of national security by eliminating the need to
live in a mutually vulnerable world. Indeed, most of the public at
one time thought SO.37 But virtually no public official, policy expert,
or scientist believed it, with the exception perhaps of Reagan, Teller,
and a few others. Even granted a perfectly working Star Wars de-
46   I   SETTING THE FRAME

fense, which few of them thought remotely possible, the United
States would remain vulnerable. Furthermore, to maintain the viabil-
ity of any strategic defense would likely require arms control agree-
ments. To most people who had thought hard about these problems,
the shield was a "nonstarter. "38 Surely, good public arguments could
have been marshalled for SDI as a means to keep up with the Soviet
research program, strengthen deterrence, or push the Soviets into
bankruptcy. But that was not how Reagan made the argument. SDI,
as presented by the President, deceived people.
   How should misleading the public be understood? Sometimes
deception is done quite deliberately as a tactic in a longer term
strategy to bring people slowly to face up to tough realities. Such
was Roosevelt's strategy in the 1940 presidential election in regard
to bringing the United States into the war. 39 Roosevelt engaged in a
strategy to pace the work of arming the public. More often, however,
misleading is a way to disarm the public. President Johnson deceived
Americans as he escalated the war in Vietnam, hoping to turn the
corner on the war before people paid too much attention to it. As
well, misleading can be a product of self-deception by authority in
collusion with people's desire for good news. 40 This, perhaps, is the
most dangerous case. A well-meaning President may avoid facing
scientific evidence and distressing realities. SDI is both a case of
deliberate deception by some officials to disarm the public and a
case, it seems, of self-deception by Reagan in collusion with the
public. 41
   Unprepared for living in a world of mutual vulnerability, many
people took quick comfort in Reagan's policy. Indeed, no previous
President had taken on the challenge of educating people, not even
President Nixon, who canonized the policy of mutual vulnerability
in the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty. President Reagan's
vision might not be very accurate, but it had great appeal as a
technical fix.
   It is quite likely that Reagan misled the country unwittingly. He
believed in SDI not as another deterrent but as an end to deterrence.
When people are challenged, the first line of defense is to apply the
responses already in their repertoire. Given the high number of major
problems human beings have sorted out through history, applying
solutions from the repertoire makes obvious sense. The solution for
                                           To Lead OT Mislead?   I 47

 new problems, however, may lie outside the repertoire, which is
exactly when adaptive work is needed. That Reagan and much of
the public harkened back to a previous adaptation to the security
dilemma-eonstructing a barricade-is understandable given that
neither he nor they had adjusted, even after thirty years, to the
fundamental transformation in the nature of security brought on by
nuclear arms. 42 In fact, Reagan's formidable political power derived,
in large measure, from his combined abilities to sense intuitively what
most people wanted to hear and to give it to them.
   President Reagan shielded himself and the nation from adapting
to the harsh but challenging new reality of interdependence in the
modern world. Deterrence has been part of that reality.43 Without
facing the fact of interdependence, the public has been ill-prepared
to understand, select, initiate, or support foreign and economic poli-
cies suited to the pursuit of better and safer relationships. Trade
agreements, foreign assistance, environmental pacts, and foreign in-
vestment at home are a part of weaving this new fabric. Ironically,
public officials often pay the price of deception. When reality catches
up with illusions and constituents discover themselves poorly pre-
pared for the current challenge, they get angry. It may be too soon
in retrospect to know, but one wonders whether this dynamic of false
hopes-played out in the case of domestic economic issues-brought
into office not only a new President but also 110 new members of
Congress amid shouts of "Clean the House" in 1992.
   Reagan's illusory plan to protect people was not simply a product
of his own person. It was also a product of the kinds of public
expectations that fallon the shoulders of the nation's senior author-
ity. Imagine how difficult it would have been for Reagan to have
given a different kind of speech on March 23, 1983, one in which
he spoke of the reality of the nation's vulnerability and dependence-
the basic logic of deterrence-without any hope of escape except
through an unforeseeable improvement in U.S.-Soviet relations. Per-
haps he could have found a way to frame it in a positive light. "Now
in human history," he might have said, "people are forced to invent
better ways to contain aggression, less destructive ways to compete,
and more powerful means to foster cooperation. On a path with
fortress isolation at one end and good relations at the other, managed
deterrence is measured progress. To move farther along that path
48   I   SETTING THE FRAME

toward cooperation is the challenge and opportunity of our age."
He might then have made one of several cases for the multibillion
dollar SDI. "SDI might not make the United States invulnerable, but
it would both strengthen deterrence and sharply increase Soviet
military costs, putting great strain on its economy should it choose
to continue the arms race."
   Unfortunately, people's expectations in times of distress often pull
authority figures away from making such speeches. Reagan's actions
ought not to surprise us. The question is, Why?
                                  3
           The Roots of Authority


Social living depends on authority. Indeed, our capacity to form
authority relationships lies at the base of our organizations, from the
family to the nation. From a human perspective, evolution reached
a major milestone when animals began to live in groups, and author-
ity and its precursors, dominance and deference, made this possible.!
OUf systems of authority serve vital social functions. Without com-
prehending these functions, one can no more exercise leadership than
Boeing Aircraft can design airplanes and ignore gravity. Some of us
may hate or distrust authority, but I doubt that we can do without
some form of it. 2
   In our everyday language, we often equate leadership with author-
ity. We routinely call leaders those who achieve high positions of
authority even though, on reflection, we readily acknowledge the
frequent lack of leadership they provide. Intuitively, we sense there
is a difference. Usually, we attribute this difference to personal skill,
temperament, and motives. Some people "have it" and some people
don't. But rarely is the personal dimension the whole story. Context
also plays a key part. Frequently, there are impediments to leadership
intrinsic to the setting that would make it hard for anybody to lead.
   One of these key impediments is authority. Because we so com-
monly equate leadership with authority, we fail to see the obstacles
to leadership that come with authority itself. Having authority brings
not only resources to bear but also serious constraints on the exercise
of leadership. We need to understand these resources and constraints.
                                   49
50   /   SETTING THE FRAME

To do so, we first need to identify the indispensable functions that
authority serves in our lives.
   Authority relationships resemble the dominance and deference
relationships of our primate ancestors. 3 Both among humans and
among primates, social frameworks provide a host of competitive
advantages compared to solitary living. To name a few, societies
protect individuals against threat, secure a food supply, care for the
young, and adapt to new environments. 4 Yet social living requires
the coordination of individual behavior-a need served, in various
ways and to varying degrees, by relationships of dominance and
authority.5 Of course, animal societies are very different from human
societies, and many people are rightly skeptical about drawing tight
inferences from primates to humans; they are leery of potential
abuse. At a minimum, however, an exploration of animal societies
provides a useful analogy when examining how human organizations
and communities coordinate and cooperate to meet vital problems. 6

          The Functions of Dominance in Primate Societies
Dominance structures serve similar functions across species, al-
though social arrangements vary in primate societies from fluid to
rigidly hierarchical. Dominant animals take a prominent stance.
They dominate the attention of the band, sometimes residing in the
spatial center of the group. By providing a central focus of attention,
the dominant animals often serve as reference points by which the
rest of the band orient themselves. By keeping an occasional eye on
the location and actions of central figures during the day's activities,
each member knows roughly which direction to travel for food, what
position to take in camp, with whom to mate, where to run for
protection, and to whom to look for the restoration of order when
a fight erupts within the band. 7
   This structuring of attention is found, for example, among moun-
tain gorillas living in the lush forests and mountains of central Africa.
Living in small groups averaging from seven to eighteen members,
the gorilla society centers around one adult male, called the silver-
back because of the silver hair on his back and neck. When in rare
circumstances three or four silverback males live in the same group,
                                          The Roots of Authority   I 51

a clear hierarchy orders their association. 8 The adult females in the
band have more fluid relationships. The hierarchy among them ap-
pears to be based on the order in which they join the group, though
a mother with very young offspring has more privileges than other
adult females. For example, she and her young are afforded greater
protection by staying in close proximity to the silverback. 9
   According to observers such as George Schaller and Dian Fossey,
the silverback provides the group with an obvious focal point of
attention, situated often at its center. 10 All eyes look to him to main-
tain the daily routine. The group travels when he moves and main-
tains the general direction he sets. When a predator threatens the
group, the silverback often charges in defense, with his fellow males
close behind. Although gorillas have few natural predators other
than man, leopards have been known to attack. The earth-shaking
chest-thump and call of a silverback has terrifying effect. Not only
does it alert the rest of the group to watch his moves for direction
toward safety, it also initiates the process of defensive attack against
intruders, including other gorilla groups that venture into his range.
According to Schaller, when he "suddenly roars, the other animals
know that something potentially dangerous is in the vicinity, and
they congregate around, or behind, their leader."
   The silverback provides the focal point that orients others to their
place in the line while traveling for food. When the band moves in
single file through the forest, he walks in front, followed by the
mother with the youngest children, then a mixture of mothers with
older children adjacent to other adult males, followed by other
females and males, and at the tail end, an adult male. When they
feed, members of the group spread out, but during rest periods they
often cluster near the silverback. In particular, the young are drawn
to him and stay close by. His role is pivotal; the group disintegrates
without his unifying influence.
   The silverback also serves a control function, mediating aggression
within the group and maintaining stability.11 Fights are infrequent,
but when they do break out the dominant male is the one most likely
to quell them. When he takes sides, which is unusual, he often stands
with the younger individual.12 But the silverback is not the only
member of the group to maintain stability. The hierarchy operates
52   I   SETTING THE FRAME

at all levels of the group: adult females dominate juveniles, and
juveniles dominate infants who have strayed from their mothers.
According to Schaller, "Contrary to popular belief, [the] dominance
hierarchy does not cause strife and dissension but promotes peace
within the group, for it relegates each member to a certain status and
position: every animal knows exactly where it stands in relation to
every other animal. "13
   In addition, the silverback establishes and maintains norms of
mating. He does not always dominate by intimidation and sheer
brute force, however. It is not unusual for a female to switch groups
to find another silverback more to her liking, often an older male.
A silverback maintains his dominance, in large part, by attracting
females and young. How he does this is not clear, but field studies
strongly suggest that the members of his band want to be near him,
and they follow him accordingly.
   In contrast with the rigid hierarchy of the small gorilla band,
chimpanzees have a far more fluid social system. Rich and sophisti-
cated patterns of coalition politics, intercommunal fighting, and
mechanisms of conflict resolution permeate daily life. 14 In the wild,
a chimpanzee community will divide into small groups that mingle
and interact. Daily decisions regarding travel are decentralized.
   Nevertheless, the chimpanzee dominance hierarchy serves a set of
social functions similar to those among mountain gorillas. Though
chimpanzees live in communities of up to 105 members, the most
constant social unit is the female and her offspring. She decides
which direction to take, she protects her young from predators and,
when conflicts break out in her group, she restores order. IS
   Adult males usually travel and feed alone or in all-male bands that
vary in composition over a week's time, and their groups have their
own dominance hierarchy. The dominant male-the alpha-may
hold his position for as long as ten years. 16 Chimpanzees appear to
be territorial, and the alpha male functions to loosely coordinate the
males in maintaining the boundary of the larger community. Within
that boundary, according to Jane Goodall, "Overall levels of aggres-
sion are likely to be low; each individual, in a manner of speaking,
'knows his place' relative to each other." But at the boundary, males
display noisily to ward off potential intruders. The dominance struc-
                                         The Roots of Authority I 53

ture, "while it cannot be said to develop in order to control aggres-
sion within a society, often functions in exactly this way." Render
the status of the alpha doubtful, and the number of aggressive en-
counters may double. 17
   Rank among chimpanzees establishes norms of male and female
pairing. For example, higher ranking females often mate with higher
ranking males. During mating periods, the occasional absence of
clear-cut dominance among aroused and aggressive males unleashes
bedlam.
   In the naturalistic setting of the Arnhem Zoo in the Netherlands,
Frans De Waal has studied the political behavior of the world's
largest community of captive chimpanzees. To human observers, the
alpha male appears larger than life. He struts erect with his long hair
standing on end, which makes him look twice as big as the others;
and he displays himself with great drama and gusto, occasionally
adding ferocity, it seems, for effect. He dominates central stage, and
few other chimpanzees can keep from gazing at his actions. In human
terms, he has charisma. When his dominance is challenged, however,
human observers are amazed at the transformation. When, after
months of contest and coalition-building, the small and seemingly
insignificant challenger succeeds in winning the dominant position,
he suddenly begins to strut erect with his hair standing on end,
inflated to nearly twice his normal size, while the fallen alpha shrinks
to half. 18 The role transforms his demeanor. Evidently, through his
apparent transformation, the new alpha male becomes a source of
arousal, by which he then provides a focal point of attention, a
reference point, for social coordination.
  The societies of chimpanzees and gorillas suggest that dominant
members perform at least five social functions: (1) choosing the
direction of group movement, (2) protecting the group from preda-
tors, (3) orienting members to their status and place, (4) controlling
conflict, and (5) maintaining norms, including norms of mating and
resource allocation. The style of a dominant chimpanzee may differ
fundamentally from that of a silverback gorilla; each society inhabits
different ecological niches and exhibits distinctive social patterns. 19
But each society apparently needs to have these five functions
fulfilled, and each uses dominance and hierarchy to do so.
54   I   SETTING THE FRAME


                          Human Societies
Before drawing analogies between these animals and human socie-
ties, at least three caveats are necessary. First, the hierarchies in
primate societies involve small groups, at least by modern human
standards. They contain as many as one hundred members, but not
five hundred, one thousand, ten thousand, or millions. Extrapolating
from nonhuman societies to humans jumps a hurdle not only be-
tween species but in levels of complexity. The pervasive phenomena
of dominance among our closest primate relations does not imply
that dominance is a natural organizing principle among humans.
Even if dominance and deference did constitute natural human ten-
dencies, these tendencies might represent vestigial behaviors that do
not provide for the needs of complex human societies. They might
be maladaptive.
   Second, human societies may not coordinate themselves by the
same mechanisms that other animal societies use. Indeed, there are
pronounced differences among many species. As we have seen, go-
rilla societies appear far more rigid than chimpanzee societies, and
gorilla boundaries of membership are less permeable and their lines
of dominance are far more linear.
   Third, we have seen the misuse of Darwin's theory in the form of
social Darwinism: the ideas that (1) someone should dominate, and
(2) those who do must deserve to. Racists and charlatans of all sorts
have tried to rationalize their prejudices by fashioning biological
arguments to support them. They invoke natural law. They confuse
biological potentiality with biological determinism. 20 For example,
men for ages have justified sexism with arguments that males domi-
nate females in many animal societies, and therefore male domina-
tion must be natural. But reasoning by analogies must allow for the
differences to lead to discoveries. Thus, among all primates, perhaps
only humans can realize equality between the sexes. 21 The power of
human learning enables human culture to ameliorate the expression
of natural behaviors which present impediments to developing a
civilized society.22 Equality, and many other precious achievements,
are products of heroic effort and hard-won cultural adaptation.
   At best, animal behavior can help us identify the biological poten-
tial of human beings toward social activity. Understood in these
                                        The Roots of Authority / 55

terms, human inclinations, like the potential for aggression and ten-
derness, will take a variety of forms depending on the context and
culture. 23 What we do with our inclinations is a product of learning.
In regard to authority, our capacity to construct a wide array of
societies with different authority structures suggests that we can
shape the elemental inclinations for dominance and deference.

Dominance in Children. Even at the age of four, youngsters gener-
ate systems of stratification. A study of preschool children in Vir-
ginia showed that those who dominated the attention of others also
won the most struggles over access to toys. Observers attached the
label "high-ranking" to these dominant children. Middle- and low-
ranking children focused their attention on those with higher rank
than themselves rather than on those whom they could displace at
the toy shelf. They also spent much more time glancing at high-rank-
ing classmates than vice versa. Attention focused upward. In addi-
tion, the children tended to orient themselves spatially (to find their
place) by locating those in their own rank and by staying in close
proximity to them. 24 In other words, orientation by perceptions of
dominance provided part of the glue that held the group together.
In a Japanese nursery school, the early departure of the dominant
child in the process of group formation resulted in the disintegration
of the group structure. 25
   Dominant children serve other functions in addition to orienta-
tion. In a Munich study of four-year-old children, the child that
commanded the most attention was also the one who most often
initiated and organized games, interceded as a third party to break
up disputes, and represented the group when interacting with an-
other group. Children of lower rank tended to obey, imitate, smile,
and offer presents to the high-ranking child. 26
   In a study of first-graders playing dodgeball, the child who ap-
peared most skillful emerged in time as the dominant individual to
whom the rest of the players looked for organization. By first and
second grade, most children agreed on the individuals with two
dominant characteristics: Who is the smartest? Who is the toughest?
Yet few agreed on the identity of the least smart and least tough
among them. Attention, again, focused upward in the hierarchy.27
   Do inherited genes account for these patterns? Or do children
56   I   SETTING THE FRAME

absorb these patterns by imitating their elders and other children?
Probably, both mechanisms play a role. At particular phases of
development, children are receptive to picking up different kinds of
lessons and cues, like language, climbing, or social grace. Our genetic
heritage has given us a biological foundation upon which many
behaviors are readily, almost inevitably learned. 28 Yet though chil-
dren may be predisposed to learn about dominance and deference,
what they learn about these relationships is largely a matter of
culture and upbringing, as the great diversity of human societies
attests.
   The dominant children in these studies performed functions that
resemble those of the dominant gorillas and chimpanzees in their
troops: direction of activity, orientation to role and place, protection
at the boundary of the group, and conflict reduction within the
group. The children taking the dominant positions provided a focal
point of attention that helped to coordinate their classmates.


Small Adult Groups. A similar picture emerges in laboratory studies
of small adult groups in the United States. 29 Three generalizations
emerge. First, when men and women who do not know one another
form a new group and undertake a task, they routinely establish a
hierarchy of roles. Second, the group often informally selects and
authorizes one of its own members to chair the group in place of
the person designated by the scientist in charge. Hence, formal and
informal authority roles do not necessarily overlap.30
   Third, the group looks to its chairperson for certain services. 31 The
group orients itself in relation to her. Once settled on the hierarchy,
the rest of the members seem to find their places and roles, and the
level of tension within the group diminishes dramatically. At the
same time, cohesion increases. 32 Authority provides orientation,
which in turn diminishes stress and provides a hub of cohesive
bonding as each member develops some tie with the chairperson. 33
Commonly, group members then look to her to direct attention to
the task and its themes. Authority provides direction. If a crisis
ensues, the group turns more of its attention to the chairperson,
expecting her to solve the problem. If she does not fulfill that expec-
tation, she loses status and sometimes the dominant role. The group
                                         The Roots of Authority / 57

expects the person in authority to provide solutions to crises and, as
a corollary, the promise or hope that a solution will be found. 34
  These studies begin to suggest a psychological mechanism for the
dynamics of authority. A group recognizes the presence of a problem
when the level of stress in the group goes up. Stress arises from
disorientation in the face of a complex task, and effective groups
normally generate an authority structure in response, sometimes
quite informally. The authority structure establishes places and roles
for group members, including the role of chairperson, and by so
doing creates a coordinating and problem-solving mechanism. When
members know to whom to turn, they feel calmed.
  As long as the person in authority can provide the services that
keep the group composed, her authority will increase; if not, she may
get deposed, or the group may fragment. Her latitude for frustrating
the expectations of the group may grow if she has succeeded in the
past in meeting the group's expectations; she can earn "idiosyncrasy
credits. "35 But in a stressful situation in which she does not have the
answers, she can also run out of credit.

                   From Dominance to Authority
I define authority as conferred power to perform a service. This
definition will be useful to the practitioner of leadership as a re-
minder of two facts: First, authority is given and can be taken away.
Second, authority is conferred as part of an exchange. Failure to meet
the terms of exchange means the risk of losing one's authority: it can
be taken back or given to another who promises to fulfill the bar-
gain. 36
   The exchange of power for a service between principal and agent
takes a characteristic form. The authorizing principal says to the
authorized agent: "Given your know-how, I give you the power to
make decisions to accomplish a service, and I'll follow those deci-
sions as long as it appears to me that they serve my purposes. "37
   For example: (1) The u.S. Congress confers power to an agency
in the form of authorizing legislation. Congress charges the agency
to perform a service, and Congress will defer to the agency's decisions
as long as it believes that the agency is doing its job. (2) A traffic
light changes color on a street corner, and drivers defer to the red
58   /   SETTING THE FRAME


light. By deferring, drivers benefit from a service performed by the
local highway department. They confer power to the civil authorities
in exchange for the coordination provided by traffic lights. (3) When
local constituents elect their state legislator, they confer power to the
legislator over decisions that will affect their lives. In exchange, they
expect the legislator to serve their needs as they perceive them.
(4) Someone who accepts a position in a firm has authority within
the scope of employment to act for the firm. The transaction is set
forth in a job description. The individual, then, gains the powers and
rewards that come with the position in exchange for performing a
set of specified services.
   In discussing adult groups, I have referred to authority and not
dominance. As theoretical types of power relations, dominance and
authority can be viewed as distinct. Dominance relationships are
based on coercion or habitual deference; authority relationships are
voluntary and conscious. In reality, however, these types of power
relations often overlap.
   Clearly, not all conscious exchanges involving power are acts of
authorization. A prudent mugging victim defers to the thief with a
gun and hands over his wallet, hoping that his deference will be met
with freedom from physical harm. The deference is quite deliberate
and the exchange clear-cut: freedom for money. But this is not an
authority relationship. The victim does not authorize the gunman.
The victim does not confer power for a service. 38
   All too often, power is just taken, and deference to it indicates no
authorization whatsoever. Yet over time, if people become accus-
tomed to deferring to dominant individuals or institutions and de-
velop a set of familiar habits and payoffs in exchange for their
continued deference, then the act of deference begins to look like
conference. Deference over time may become authorization, even
without deliberate decision.
   Thus, not all authority relationships are the product of a conscious
and deliberate conferring of power. Often, like dominance, they are
produced by habitual deference. 39 Many of us have been so condi-
tioned to defer to authority that we do not realize the extent to which
we are the source of an authority's power. 40 We forget that we are
the principals. 41 When we realize our collective power, the person in
authority becomes vulnerable because we can retract the power we
have given. Such was the American Revolution.
                                        The Roots of Authority I 59

   The overlap between conference and habitual deference is obvious
in childhood. A young child does not confer power to parents, but
defers. A child learns, and perhaps is predisposed, to look up to
them. His life depends on it. Yet when the child grows older, he
begins to consider how much power to continue giving his parents.
For what help should he look to them? For what help should he look
to others? What was previously habitual deference may become
conference.
   The extent to which different people are able to confer power
rather than defer by habit differs markedly. Some people grow up
aware that the choice to confer power lies within them. They learn
to question conventional structures and participate in the exchange
of power for services. They come to think of authority figures with
mutuality. But many do not. Many people take their powerlessness
for granted. If they have grown up disenfranchised, they may have
good reason.
   If conscious choosing versus habit does not neatly distinguish
authority from dominance, perhaps the presence of coercion in the
bargaining separates them. Although the example of mugging shows
that a coercive power relationship is sometimes purely dominance,
does that mean that all power relationships involving coercion are
purely dominance, and not authorization? Clearly, every government
has the means to coerce its citizens in order to maintain norms,
control conflict, provide direction, and protect boundaries. 42 The
courts and the police are inherently coercive. We manage a host of
personal and socially defeating tendencies that we seek to inhibit in
ourselves (unethical, impulsive, destructive behaviors) by authorizing
coercive reinforcements to bolster our will. The threat of coercion is
part of the authorization we give to the traffic police, for example,
to prevent accidents at dangerous intersections. Not only do we want
that threat to inhibit the impulses of other drivers, we also look to
it at times to bridle our own. The speeding ticket that we contest
one week may save our lives the next.
   The events surrounding Gorbachev's disruption of the Soviet Un-
ion illustrate more fully the overlap between dominance and author-
ity. The Soviet revolution of 1917 inherited a people conditioned
during centuries of Czarist Russia to defer to the government. Stalin's
domination reinforced this deference. In contrast, Gorbachev in-
tended perestroika, the restructuring, to invert people's orientation
60   I   SETTING THE FRAME

to power. He intended to give local businesses and city governments
the power and responsibility for solving their own problems, possibly
in divergence with commands from the central government. 43
   But Gorbachev found that giving people power does not readily
produce empowered and responsible citizens. Not only do people
have to change their concepts of power and responsibility, they also
have to give up the payoffs of deference: political and economic
security. In the old system, people knew where the government stood;
its services in the form of jobs and welfare were secure and predict-
able. Most people did not have to worry about getting fired or laid
off, or going homeless or hungry. If civil unrest surfaced in the
countryside, all knew that order would be restored. If a foreign
nation threatened war, the government's protective response would
be decisive. No one need worry about drug abuse either (except with
alcohol) because the borders were sealed tight and the punishments
for the crime predictable and severe.
   In authority relationships, both principals and agents make
choices. 44 In the Soviet Union, once Gorbachev made the choices
explicit between the old way and the new, we saw significant resis-
tance throughout the land to the insecurities that would come with
a nontotalitarian government. Gorbachev cut against the grain, not
just of party apparatchiks and government bureaucrats but of nu-
merous Soviet citizens as well. Once they had a choice, many were
not sure at all that they wanted to change the terms of agreement. 45
   The Soviet resistance to political and economic liberalization sur-
prised many Americans because we thought of the Soviet people as
"enchained citizens of a totalitarian government," and we assumed
that the average citizen would immediately rejoice at having the same
freedoms that we have. We believed that a small elite generated the
authority of the Soviet government through coercive powers-that
for the vast majority of people these were purely dominance rela-
tionships. The Soviet reactions to reform in the early 1990s, how-
ever, suggest that government by the people has many forms, and
some of them resemble dictatorship. In fact, we failed to appreciate
that the relationship between the public and its government entailed
an implicit exchange for services, though not a bargain we would
undertake, given our values and priorities. Many Soviet citizens
struck a deal long ago with those who were vying for political power,
                                        The Roots of Authority I 61

trading various freedoms for security and equity.46 Once the chance
to gain those freedoms was at hand, it was not universally accepted
that their costs were worth the gains. The free expression of nation-
alism, as well as economic hardships, broke the Soviet empire, but
the pressures on national authorities from many citizens to return to
a variation of the old order were so great that no one in the early
1990s could readily predict the outcome.
   Often, the deal to confer power in exchange for a service is made
so automatically that the phrase "social habit" may fit better than
"social contract. "47 A contract is a deliberate arrangement between
consenting parties. Yet many of us who grow up within one society
know of no other set of possible arrangements. We have not
"agreed" in the sense of deliberately choosing among a set of alter-
native options. We live in our worlds and carryon its bargains as
we know them. 48
   The transformation of either a dominance or a habitual authority
relationship into a social contract is no small event. These are revo-
lutions. Even the idea itself that such transformations can be
achieved signaled a major intellectual development. For many politi-
cal activists during the American and French revolutions, Rousseau's
contribution to the idea of "social contract" represented not a his-
torical account of authority and its genesis but an aspiration for
humanity.49 Can we elevate our unconscious bargains to a conscious
level of deliberate choosing?
   The concept of social contract may be one cornerstone of democ-
racy, yet democracy is not so easily achieved in light of our inclina-
tion to look to authority with overly expectant eyes. In part,
democracy requires that average citizens become aware that they are
indeed the principals and that those upon whom they confer power
are their agents. They have also to bear the risks, the costs, and the
fruits of shared responsibility and civic participation.

                       Authority and Culture
Beyond the capacity for authority and dominance, human evolution
reached another major milestone with the development of the mental
ability to internalize representations of authority as conscience. 5o
Unlike many animals, we do not have to keep authority figures in
62   /   SETTING THE FRAME

our actual line of sight. We assimilate the lessons and habits of our
seniors: parents, teachers, and others. Their voices and the values,
beliefs, norms, and rules they embody can be both internalized and
abstracted, that is, detached from the person.
   Of course, the internalized voices within us do not sing in unison.
Often, they do not even sing in harmony. We internalize a host of
competing authorities, each with a different voice and perspective,
as we grow up around a variety of people. Furthermore, we develop
the psychological capacity to observe the internal counterpoint
among these voices in any given problem situation (the voice of our
mother, father, teacher, boss, spouse, friend) and to choose which
voices to heed and which to ignore.51
   The debates within us give us the room to choose. We can evaluate,
weigh options, and tryout competing points of view. Internal
conflicts are both a burden and a blessing. It is hard to imagine what
children would be like if they were to grow up surrounded by
unanimity everywhere, with only one internalized voice of authority.
Indeed, we can trace the richness, creativity, and complexity of our
cultures and organizations to our ability as individuals to carryon
an internal debate among a variety of voices, including the one we
call our own.
   Our capacity to internalize the teachings of authorities enables the
formation of culture and, consequently, large and flexible societies
and organization.52 In a large social system, the norms that guide
people's behavior have to be portable. We have to be able to act our
parts as members of a society without constant reference to an
authority figure. Thus, our cultural norms fulfill in many ways the
social functions of authority.53
   The existence of a robust culture, however, cannot replace entirely
the need for an authority system. The office of authority provides a
position about which people's expectations cluster.54 Indeed, the per-
petuation of the culture requires a trustworthy network of authori-
ties so that children internalize a fairly coherent set of norms. In the
absence of such a network, we see various patterns of behavior, some
of them dysfunctional. For example, a society may perpetuate a
subculture of crime, street gangs, teen-age pregnancy, and drug abuse
when relentless poverty and prejudice compromise the network of
local and parental authority, disconnecting it from the larger com-
                                          The Roots of Authority /    63

munity, its authority structure, and its promise. Thus, children in
many of our American cities grow up internalizing a deep distrust of
societal authority and the norms it represents. The distrust then
reinforces the subculture of disconnection, fueling a vicious cycle. 55
    In societies with well-established and coherent institutions, author-
ity may primarily playa symbolic role as the embodiment of cultural
norms. Indeed, during long periods of stability, the role of authority
may even seem to vanish. But it never disappears entirely.56 Appar-
ently, people always need to glance, at least on occasion, toward
some central figure, even if only a figurehead.
    For example, in the !Kung civilization of southwestern Africa,
cultural constructs seem to have replaced the need for strong author-
ity.57 Yet the authority figure still plays a role. In each band, the
headman coordinates the use of water and gathered foods. The water
and plants within a given area are "owned" collectively by the band,
and the headman, as the visible symbol of the land to outsiders,
controls the consumption of its resources. Thus, when !Kung visitors
from other bands enter the area, they ask the headman for permis-
sion to use these resources.
    By and large, however, well-established norms of resource alloca-
tion reduce the need for the headman to exert his authority. The
headman's duties dwindle because the families of the band resolve
conflicts and ration provisions as a routine. Even his job of deciding
to which part of the territory the band should move to gather food
is made simple because generally the band already knows where to
go. The social functions of authority have largely been incorporated
into a stable system of norms and rules carried within each family
and member.
    Hunting provides a vivid illustration. The practice of hunting
supplies about 20 percent of a band's food, yet wild animals obvi-
ously do not confine themselves to anybody's land in open country-
side. Consequently, the !Kung are faced frequently with potential
conflicts over the rights to an animal shot by one band on the land
of another. One obvious mechanism to resolve such a dispute would
entail establishing a superior authority to both bands, for example,
a tribal council to establish and enforce laws. The !Kung mechanism,
however, is to establish a tribal norm. An animal is the property of
whoever appears to have killed it (the person whose arrow first
64   /   SETTING THE FRAME

pierces and stays in the animal). This norm is agreed upon by the
various bands, and few disputes arise. The norm is reinforced by
other norms. Food is shared among members of a band so that
nobody gains that much from an individual kill, and nobody loses
that much, dampening the stakes in any individual dispute.
   Ultimately, the headman is accountable for the maintenance of
these norms, but under stable conditions the norms lessen greatly the
effort required of him. 58 The function of the headman is to symbolize
the norms and their continuity. For example, when members of the
!Kung were asked what would happen if an outsider were found
stealing food, they responded that the headman would be responsible
for "chasing him away." And if anyone attempted to join the band
and partake in its food without proper kinship affiliation, the head-
man would be expected to tell them, "You are not a relative. You
must not come to live in my band." However, no one could recall
such events ever taking place. 59

                 Stress and Charismatic Authority
We have seen that dominance relationships serve key social functions
in animal societies, and that in human societies, cultural norms
partially take the place of authority relationships in coordinating
social activity. By and large, however, we have looked at already
established communities unchallenged by sharp divisive conflict or
extraordinary external pressure. Indeed, these stable situations are
the daily workings of our lives. Authorities usually have the know-
how to fulfill our expectations. And what they do not provide in
terms of guidance, prevailing cultural norms provide. In Max We-
ber's terms, both the traditional and bureaucratic forms of authority
suffice in helping to hold the community together and solve routine
problems. 60
   However, what happens at the start-up of an organization when
corporate norms have yet to be formed, or when an established
society faces an adaptive challenge and must renew itself? At the
beginning of an organization's life, the authority's job of directing,
protecting, orienting, resolving conflicts, and establishing norms be-
comes paramount. He may appear larger than life because he is
indeed doing so much. As the source of the organization's energy, he
                                          The Roots of Authority   /   65

infuses people's work with meaning. As the founding father, he is
likely to be invested with charisma by those around him. 61 Many
founding fathers are remembered just so. Yet over time, as "a way
of doing business" develops, the office of senior authority takes on
a life of its own. 62 The charisma is transferred from the person to
the office, where it then rubs off on whoever holds it; and depending
on the stresses of the time and the person's ability to act as the
repository of people's hopes, the magic may rub off a little or a lot. 63
Anyone who enters the Oval Office for the first time, no matter his
rank, knows this feeling.
   What happens after the start-up period and after routinization,
when we face a new challenge and our norms and rules do not seem
to work? The office itself and the routines it embodies can no longer
carry the load, and we expect the officeholder to provide, as in the
days of the founder, decisive direction, protection, orientation, con-
trol of conflict, and the restoration of norms. 64 We expect authorities
to step into the breach. We lean on them to restore equilibrium. 65 We
seek reassurance. Indeed, in March 1933, when Franklin Roosevelt
became President at the depth of the Great Depression and in the
midst of the national banking crisis, he was expected to do no less
than save the people. Some even likened him to the Messiah. But
not, quite fortunately, his wife. Eleanor Roosevelt called the inaugu-
ration "very, very solemn and a little terrifying because when Frank-
lin got to that part of his speech when he said it might become
necessary for him to assume powers ordinarily granted to a President
in war time, he received his biggest demonstration. "66
   When the stress is severe, we seem especially willing to grant
extraordinary power and give away our freedom. 67 In a historical
study of thirty-five dictatorships, all of them emerged during times
of social distress. 68 Unhinged from their habits, people look with
greater intensity to authority figures for remedies. 69 We invest in them
not only various formal powers with which to meet our needs but
our personal trust that they can deliver. We rally to a person, a point,
or a symbol; in so reacting we expect to discover, or to be told, how
to respond. Hitler, who came to power only weeks before Roosevelt,
described the phenomenon with great insight: "That is the mightiest
mission of our Movement, namely, to give the searching and bewil-
dered masses a new, firm belief, a belief which will not abandon them
66   I   SETTING THE FRAME

in these days of chaos, which they will swear and abide by, so that
at least somewhere they will again find a place where their hearts
can be at rest." 70
   We attribute charisma to people who voice our pains and provide
us with promise. Sometimes in our desperation we do so without
critical thought. Perhaps similar to chimpanzees who require an
arousing alpha to serve as a reference point, we too in times of
disorientation seem inclined to endow our authorities with idealized
gifts. As long as they serve this need, we imagine them larger than
life. We do not realize that the source of their charisma is our own
yearning. What would have become of Adolf Hitler had he been born
in normal times?71
   When shared norms can no longer provide sufficient orientation,
the capacity of authority relationships to contain the stresses of
society provides a key backup system. 72 We will explore that resource
in our discussion of holding environments. Mismanaged, however,
dependency on authority discourages people from engaging with
problems when they must. Instead of generating creativity and re-
sponsibility, charismatic authority can generate a mindless following
or devolve into bureaucratic institutions that rely on central planning
and control. 73 Creativity is stimulated by engaging with one's envi-
ronment, but the skill of sensing local environments becomes dulled
as people fasten their gaze on the charismatic figure or the chain of
command for direction. Focusing upward, people lose touch with
their communities, markets, and personal resources.
   The social functions we call upon authority to serve need to be
met. But how should they be met in the context of adaptive work,
when distress rises in the society? How can one fashion and use
authority relationships to mobilize rather than hinder a community's
adaptive efforts?
    Part II

Leading With
 Authority
                                 4
        Mobilizing Adaptive Work


In times of distress, we turn to authority. To the breaking point, we
place our hopes and frustrations upon those whose presumed knowl-
edge, wisdom, and skill show the promise of fulfillment. Authorities
serve as repositories for our worries and aspirations, holding them,
if they can, in exchange for the powers we give them.
   In our organizations and in our politics, we look generally to our
authorities for direction, protection, and order. Direction may take
the form of vision, goals, strategy, and technique, but on some
preconscious level, it may simply mean "finding the next feeding
site." Protection may take the form of negotiating a favorable and
mutually beneficial agreement with a competitor, but basically it
connotes scanning the environment for threats and mobilizing the
response. Order, as we began to view it in the previous chapter,
consists of three things: orienting people to their places and roles,
controlling internal conflict, and establishing and maintaining
norms. 1
   It should be obvious from reflecting on our daily lives that author-
ity relationships are enormously productive. The human capacity for
generating complex systems of authority is essential to our extraor-
dinary adaptability and creativity as social creatures. Without our
innate abilities to organize ourselves to solve problems, much of
what we call civilization likely would not exist. 2
   Yet many of us have mixed feelings about authority. Perhaps
because we know from experience that authority relationships con-
                                  69
70   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

sist essentially of dependencies, some of us are ambivalent about
giving power, and others are ambivalent about taking it. Having been
disappointed or abused in these relationships, some of which may
strongly resemble dominance, many of us do not like to be depend-
ent, or depended upon. Dependency makes us feel vulnerable, con-
trolled, or overwhelmed by the expectations other people place upon
us.
   Appropriate dependencies, however, arise every day. Whenever we
develop an organization or a political community, we establish a
system of authorizations by which various persons or groups coor-
dinate their efforts and take on specialized roles and functions. 3 We
construct a network of appropriate dependencies based on a realistic
appraisal of what we and others can provide. In the programming
division of a major Boston computer company, for example, Carol
Lewis supervises John Edwards, who writes programs. 4 Carol de-
pends on John for imaginative and timely production. In turn, John
depends on Carol to provide him with clear specifications of the
operations his computer programs should perform. In addition,
Carol must provide John with a steady pay-check, computer time,
workspace, and supplies. Furthermore, Carol has to maintain order
in the workplace by orienting John to his role vis-a-vis other staff,
resolving conflicts on joint projects and resources, and maintaining
norms of warmth and civility around the office.
   Manager and subordinate depend on each other. On one hand, if
John disappoints Carol by failing to meet her expectations for qual-
ity and timeliness, she may reduce his authorization, either by subtly
avoiding his advice on new projects, or by firing him. Similarly, if
Carol disappoints John by failing to meet his expectations for direc-
tion, protection, and order, he may withdraw his support for her
authority. He may undermine her position by making her look in-
competent with her own supervisor; or he might diminish her repu-
tation among her colleagues and subordinates. Or he may leave. On
the other hand, when satisfying each other's expectations, Carol and
John are inclined to reinforce each other's authority. Each increases
the reputation and influence of the other.
   Supervisor and supervisee are at once dependent and vulnerable.
Their dependence derives from the importance of their relationship
to the task at hand. Thus, to the extent that the dependence between
                                      Mobiliting Adaptive Work    /   71

Carol and John functions realistically to meet a set of agreed upon
goals, dependency seems quite appropriate. Carol and John depend
on each other, not because either of them is a weak person but
because, within the context of their organization, they have mutual
interests and suitable skills to meet those interests.
   In order to distinguish later between adaptive and maladaptive
authority relationships, we need first to draw a line between appro-
priate and inappropriate dependencies. Consider the hospital person-
nel that staff the emergency room. Without an explicit hierarchy of
authority by which to orchestrate the actions of a medical staff
needing to provide a swift and coordinated response, chaos would
ensue. Someone takes charge, usually a physician, and all eyes turn
to her for cues and instructions. Information flows from all the
members of the staff toward her: from the person monitoring the
blood pressure, the person inserting the intravenous line and infusing
medication, and the person monitoring the EKG. She provides a
focus of attention that orients members of the team to their place
and role; she provides direction; she stops any disruptive conflict that
arises on the team.
   In theory, however, if the members of the staff had worked to-
gether over a long period of time and had seen most of the kinds of
situations that would come their way, each would know what role
to take without much need for on-the-.spot coordination or central
decisionmaking. The functions generally served by authority would
have been incorporated into the norms of the group. The likelihood
of dysfunction in the absence of authority would diminish. s Yet most
emergency rooms have rotations and turnovers in their teams, mak-
ing a comprehensive set of norms unrealistic. Looking to the person
in authority to serve critical functions therefore seems entirely ap-
propriate.
   The staff of an emergency room face a kind of problem similar to
many everyday situations. These problems are technical in the sense
that we know already how to respond to them. Often, they can only
be accomplished with mastery and ingenuity. They are not easy, nor
are they unimportant. Their solutions frequently save lives and re-
quire great organizational effort. These problems are technical be-
cause the necessary knowledge about them already has been digested
and put in the form of a legitimized set of known organizational
72   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

procedures guiding what to do and role authorizations guiding who
should do it.
   For these situations, we turn to authority with reasonable expec-
tations. In our various social systems, our authority structures and
the norms they maintain govern thousands of problem-solving proc-
esses. Meeting a host of vital and everyday problems, they are the
product of previously accomplished adaptive work. Indeed, these
systems took a long time for our cultures to develop. Over the course
of history, we have successfully faced an array of adaptive challenges
by developing new knowledge and organizations with new norms.
Now that we have them, many of our problems have become rou-
tine. Our authority systems already "know" how to respond. And
because we know how to respond, the stresses generated by these
problems are temporary. For example, a car breaks down and a
mechanic, an authority on fixing cars, is called in. A child breaks her
arm and an orthopedic surgeon, an authority on fixing arms, is asked
to set the bone. A social security check fails to arrive, and a local
politician is called to "work the bureaucracy" for her constituent.
The marketing department in a company is behind schedule in wrap-
ping up a proposal for an important customer and the vice-president
for marketing steps in to authorize a redeployment of staff to meet
the deadline.
   For many problems, however, no adequate response has yet been
developed. Examples abound: poverty at home and abroad, indus-
trial competitiveness, failing schools, drug abuse, the national debt,
racial prejudice, ethnic strife, AIDS, environmental pollution. No
organizational response can be called into play that will clearly
resolve these kinds of problems. No clear expertise can be found, no
single sage has general credibility, no established procedure will
suffice. Stresses build up and produce a sense of urgency among
certain groups within society and sometimes throughout society. In
these situations, our inclination to look to authority may generate
inappropriate dependencies. 6
   These are the times for leadership. Problems that cause persistent
distress do so because the system of accepted dependencies being
applied to them cannot do the job. We look to our authorities for
answers they cannot provide. What happens, then? Authorities, un-
der pressure to be decisive, sometimes fake the remedy or take action
                                      Mobiliting Adaptive Work    I 73

that avoids the issue by skirting it. We instigate drug wars across our
border instead of facing the ills of our cities. 7 In the short term, of
course, this may quell some of the distress at home. If the admini-
stration succeeds in shifting the public's attention to a substitute
problem in a foreign nation, then the problem at home may cause
less discontent. Attention is deflected from the issue, which appears
to be taken care of. That more American citizens know the names
Pablo Escobar, Medellin, and Manuel Noriega than know anything
about their local drug treatment facility indicates how readily we
invite distraction. 8 But in the long term, some problems get worse,
and then frustration arises both with the problem situation and with
those people in authority who were supposed to resolve it. In re-
sponse to our frustration, we are likely to perpetuate the vicious cycle
by looking even more earnestly to authority, but this time we look
for someone new offering more certainty and better promises. We
may rid ourselves of our current authorities in the hope that "if only
we had the right leader our problems would be solved."9
   Habitually seeking solutions from people in authority is maladap-
tive. Indeed, it is perhaps the essence of maladaptive behavior: the
use of a response appropriate to one situation in another where it
does not apply. Authority relationships are critical to doing work in
many routine situations and, applied properly, can be used invalu-
ably in more challenging times; yet misapplied, they serve to avoid
work. The flight to authority is particularly dangerous for at least
two reasons: first, because the work avoidance often occurs in re-
sponse to our biggest problems and, second, because it disables some
of our most important personal and collective resources for accom-
plishing adaptive work.

           Distinguishing Adaptive from Technical Work
The practice of medicine illustrates the distinction between technical
and adaptive problems, and the dynamics these problems generate.
Patients come to physicians with symptoms and signs of illness. They
hope that their doctor will be able to "fix" the problem, but they do
not know if their hopes are well-founded. Often, the physician can
indeed cure the illness. If a person has an infection, there are many
times when the physician can say, "I have an antibiotic medication
74   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

that will almost definitely cure you without any effort or life adjust-
ment needed on your part. The medication is virtually harmless. I
can give you one shot, or a week of pills, whichever YO'u prefer." For
the purposes of our discussion, we can call these technical situations
Type I-situations in which the patient's expectations are realistic:
the doctor can provide a solution and the problem can be defined,
treated, and cured on the basis of (I) using the doctor's expertise,
and (2) shifting the patient's burden primarily onto the doctor's
shoulders. The patient appropriately depends on the doctor's know-
how, and the doctor depends on the patient's trust, satisfaction, and
willingness to arrange payment.
   These Type I situations are somewhat mechanical: one can actually
go to somebody and "get it fixed." Many medical and surgical
problems are of this sort, and many of them are life-saving. From
the doctor's point of view, these provide gratifying moments when
she can say, "Finally somebody has brought me a problem that I can
solve!" Although the patient's cooperation is crucial in these situ-
ations, the weight of problem-defining and problem-solving rests
with the physician. The patient looks to her to provide a prescription
that at once will offer direction (take this medicine), protection (the
medicine will overcome the infection), and order (you should be able
to resume normal activity within the week).
   Of course, many situations that bring people to doctors are not
so technical. We can separate these adaptive situations into Types II
and III. In Type II situations, the problem is definable but no clear-cut
solution is available. The doctor may have a solution in mind, but
she cannot implement it. And a solution that cannot be implemented
is not really a solution; it is simply an idea, a proposal. The patient
must create the solution in Type II situations, though the doctor may
play a central role. Heart disease sometimes presents a Type II
problem. The patient can be restored to more or less full operating
capacity, but only if he takes responsibility for his health by making
appropriate life adjustments. In particular, he will have to consider
the doctor's prescriptions for long-term medication, exercise, diet
program, and stress reduction. He will have to choose among these.
Type II situations can be managed in a mechanical way only partially
by the physician. She diagnoses and prescribes, but her recommen-
dations will have side effects requiring the patient's evaluation of the
                                       Mobilizing Adaptive Work     I 75

tradeoffs. What new balance should he reach between cutting down
the intensity of his job, getting exercise, or eating better? The patient
has to recognize his own problem enough to provoke adaptive
change. The responsibility for meeting the problem has to be shared.
   In these situations, the doctor's technical expertise allows her to
define the problem and suggest solutions that may work. But merely
giving the patient a technical answer does not help the patient. Her
prescribing must actively involve the patient if she is to be effective.
The patient needs to confront the choices and changes that face him.
The doctor's technical answers mean nothing if the patient does not
implement them. Only he can reset the priorities of his life. He has
to learn new ways. And the doctor has to manage the learning
process in order to help the patient help himself. The dependency on
authority appropriate to technical situations becomes inappropriate
in adaptive ones. The doctor's authority still provides a resource to
help the patient respond, but beyond her substantive knowledge, she
needs a different kind of expertise-the ability to help the patient do
the work that only he can do.
   Type III situations are even more difficult. The problem definition
is not clear-cut, and technical fixes are not available. The situation
calls for leadership that induces learning when even the doctor does
not have a solution in mind. Learning is required both to define
problems and implement solutions. Chronic illness and impending
death from any cause often fit this category. In these situations, the
doctor can continue to operate in a mechanical mode by diagnosing
and prescribing remedies (and a "remedy" of some sort can usually
be found). Yet doing so avoids the problem-defining and problem-
solving work of both doctor and patient.
   In Type II and III situations, treating the illness is too narrow a
way for the patient and the physician to define the task. It applies a
technical formulation to a nontechnical problem. When critical as-
pects of the situation are probably unchangeable, the problem be-
comes more than the medical condition. For example, if the patient's
diagnosis is an advanced stage of cancer in which the likelihood of
cure is remote, it may be useless-indeed, a denial of reality-to
define the primary problem as cancer. Cancer, in this case, is a
condition. To the limited extent it can be treated at all, it is only part
of the problem. To define cancer as the primary problem leads
76   I     LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

everyone involved to concentrate on finding solutions to the cancer,
thus diverting their attention from the real work at hand. The pa-
tient's real work consists of facing and making adjustments to harsh
realities that go beyond his health condition and that include several
possible problems: making the most out of his life; considering what
his children may need after he is gone; preparing his wife, parents,
loved ones, and friends; and completing valued professional tasks.
   Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the three types of situ-
ations.

                          Table 1. Situational Types

                                            Primary locus
             Problem       Solution and     of responsibility
Situation    definition    implementation   for the work        Kind of work

Type I       Clear         Clear            Physician           Technical

Type II      Clear         Requires         Physician           Technical
                           learning         and patient         and adaptive

Type III     Requires      Requires         Patient>            Adaptive
             learning      learning         physician


   Unfortunately, neither doctors nor patients are inclined to differ-
entiate between technical and adaptive work. Indeed, the harsher the
reality, the harder we look to authority for a remedy that saves us
from adjustment. By and large, we want answers, not questions.
Even the toughest individual tends to avoid realities that require
adaptive work, searching instead for an authority, a physician, to
provide the way out. And doctors, wanting deeply to fulfill the
yearning for remedy, too often respond willingly to the pressures we
place on them to focus narrowly on technical answers.
   The doctor in the following case faced exactly these pressures.

                             Buchanan's Illness
Steve Buchanan was 42 years old when he noticed a pain in his back
below the ribs on the right side. 10 It was the fall of 1985, and Steve,
                                      Mobilizing Adaptive Work    /   77

a strong-minded carpenter, had done all right in the spiraling Boston
housing market of those years. He and his wife, Connie, had married
young, and their three children were already teenagers. Connie, who
had been working in the home, had recently begun to contemplate
what she might do now that the children were getting old enough to
leave.
   Steve called the doctor whom he had known for ten years since
he had suffered and passed a kidney stone. To Dr. Barbara Parsons,
Steve's current complaint sounded like a repeat of the same problem,
except milder. Yet a routine study suggested something else, possibly
even cancer of the stomach. Without further tests-a CT scan, en-
doscopy-and possibly surgery, she couldn't be sure.
   Up until that moment, Steve Buchanan and his family had no cause
for alarm. They assumed the pain was nothing serious. Yet the need
for a CT scan might signal something different. When Dr. Parsons
told Steve about the test, however, she buffered the news by saying
that there was no reason to be alarmed, that they were just playing
it safe and making sure. Parsons saw no need to generate distress
before knowing all the facts. Steve's response was informative: he
agreed to the test saying, "No sweat, Doc, I'm sure it will be O.K."
   Dr. Parsons had only bad news. In fact, the tests did indicate cancer
of the stomach. Major surgery would be needed to take out the
stomach and to find out the extent to which the cancer had spread.
That was the technical side. Yet what was Dr. Parsons to say, par-
ticularly after Steve's subtle "instruction" to have O.K. news to tell?
   The situation was nothing new to Parsons. Only a few patients in
her thirty years of practice had ever said, "Doc, I'm hoping for the
best, but just tell me what I've got." Most people needed time to
take in information that demanded a major reorientation of their
lives. And Parsons's job, as she saw it, was to help people like Steve
accomplish that reorientation, but at a pace appropriate to them. So
she told Steve the bad news, but again in buffered form.
   Parsons buffered the news in two ways. First, she simply withheld
information about the kind of cancer, the odds of curing it, and the
likelihood of its spread. Instead, she told Steve that he had a "form
of stomach cancer that she hoped was localized to the stomach" and
that surgery would be necessary to take it out. Steve didn't ask for
details about the disease.
78   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

  Parsons's second form of buffering was more subtle. By emphasiz-
ing all the actions that the medical team would be taking, Parsons
conveyed a tone of activism and decision that relieved Steve from
having to do more than agree at this point. She told him, "Sometimes
we find tumor cells in lymph nodes and if that is the case, we will
probably need to give you chemotherapy after surgery." Action com-
municated more than words; it conveyed authoritative know-how
upon which to rely.
  Steve's surgery revealed what his CT scan anticipated. Cancer had
spread beyond his stomach, and not all of the cancer could be
removed. Statistically comparing his condition with the outcome of
other people having the same form and spread of cancer, Dr. Parsons
thought that Steve had a thirty percent chance of living more than
a year and a five percent chance of living five years.
  After surgery, Parsons entered Steve's room looking for clues to
Steve's readiness to listen. Connie was there, too. Dr. Parsons ap-
peared serious but not somber. She started with a question, "Hello
Connie, Hi Steve, how do you feel after the surgery?" Steve re-
sponded, "This can't be real. I'm not ready for this." Connie asked,
"Tell us the good news, Dr. Parsons, Steve's going to be O.K. isn't
he?"
  At this point, let's step back to contemplate what Dr. Parsons
should do. If she were to do just what she felt like doing, she might
weep and cry out, "I am heartbroken-the news from surgery is bad,
very bad." Yet people in authority are not generally expected to let
their emotions go, and that isn't what the Buchanans seemed to be
asking for, either. Were Parsons to do what she felt like doing, Steve
and Connie might be so disturbed by the suddenness of her outburst
and the helplessness implied by her words that they might have fired
her and found another doctor, someone who would fit their expec-
tations-someone who would contain their anxiety by promising a
return to normalcy. Indeed, Parsons had known patients who had
spent their last months and their last savings searching all over the
country and abroad for a doctor promising a cure. She had also
known patients who had gone into deep immobilizing depression
and people who had committed suicide upon getting bad news even
though they would have had at least many months ahead of feeling
healthy.
                                       Mobiliting Adaptive Work     I 79

   Parsons felt that she had to contain the Buchanans' anxiety to the
extent that they indicated they needed it. Containing their anxiety
meant, in operational terms, buffering the information and fulfilling
their expectations of authority-for direction, protection, and restor-
ing order. The same two techniques as before would apply: telling
only some of the truth in the words, and conveying doctorly activism,
know-how, and hopefulness in the tone of her actions.
   Some people would view this strategic approach to doctoring as a
parentalistic sham. Parsons did not. She saw no point in overwhelm-
ing people and families by demolishing the underpinnings of their
dreams and plans in the name of "telling the truth." She felt that
people's defenses deserved respect, and when facing adaptive chal-
lenges, people often need time. They need time to see their lives in a
different light-to change their images of the future and the plans
nurtured over a lifetime. They need time to tap their own strengths,
to go against their natural inclination to depend inappropriately on
authority when in distress. They need time to develop their own
response ability. To Parsons, abdicating the duty to guide people
through this process seemed cruel.
   Yet buffering truth so persistently that patients live in a false state
of security until the last weeks of life also seemed cruel, although it
was not uncommon among her medical colleagues. The strategy of
denial is popular because patients and their families are spared the
work of adapting their lives to the conditions facing them. Being
relieved of that work, they often delight in the doctor who seems
always to have a hopeful word and a decisive next step. For the
doctor, emotional gratification comes from serving that role. It
satisfies one's aspiration to provide hope against hope, "to slay the
dragon" and heal the sick. The harm is subtle, yet quite real. With
major tasks left unfaced, major scars are left with the living. Unre-
solved conflicts between parent and child, husband and wife, and
with friends and colleagues are left to fester. A time of healing is
squandered. Financial questions and key professional priorities are
neglected. Good-byes are said badly, if at all. And though the doctor
may never hear about it, the surviving loved ones pay the price.
   In light of surgery, Dr. Parsons switched gears in her mind. The
situation was clearly a Type III and not a Type I problem. The
Buchanans faced an adaptive challenge that could not be met solely
80   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

by Parsons's technical expertise. Beyond her technical know-how, the
situation demanded her leadership. Being a religious person, she
thought of Scripture: leading people through the "valley of the
shadow of death." She also knew the pitfalls of comparing herself
with God; she did not fancy that she could see the future: all she had
were statistics, and statistics only tell us the averages in a large group
of people. Parsons's uncertainty made it easier to convey hope be-
cause statistics usually demonstrate the few who succeed against the
odds. In any individual case, there is always reason for hope. No one
can foresee the future of a particular patient with certainty. Of
course, Parsons would also offer all the medical techniques that
might give Steve the best odds. All that was the simple part.
   More complex was the process of getting Steve and his family to
adapt to the uncertain yet significant possibility that his life would
end within the next few years. Parsons would have to pace this
process depending on the rate at which the Buchanans could do this
kind of work. Bringing to bear her ten years of experience with the
family would help, but it would not be sufficient. Parsons knew that
she would have to improvise, testing the waters with each step that
she moved forward. She would now be in the business of diagnosing
not a medical condition but the adaptive capacity of the patient, his
family, and their social network.
   Questions like these would guide her: How does this family handle
stress? Do they bolster each other's resourcefulness, or do they take
out their stresses on one another? Who in the family seems resilient
and could serve as a bulwark in this process? Given what I know
about this family, what are some of the definable problems they are
likely to face regarding children, jobs, and finances?
   The process would not be so delicate that Parsons had to worry
about each and every mistake. Testing the waters meant that she had
to take some risks in asking questions. Some of those questions might
backfire, but she had some leeway. Her professional experience told
her that she would have several chances to back off if she went too
far-before destroying her relationship with the family.
   In their first encounter after surgery, Steve and Connie's remarks
indicated to Dr. Parsons that she should go slow. "I'm not ready for
this." "Tell us the good news, Dr. Parsons." She thought that she
should wait a few sessions before suggesting that they begin thinking
                                      Mobilizing Adaptive Work     I 81

about a contingency plan for the possibility of dying. So she re-
sponded in a hopeful way, withholding information without lying
overtly. "Surgery went well. We think we got it all out. But we found
some tumor cells in some of your lymph nodes. They can be a
problem, so we will need to give you some drugs to try to control
the little that's left, and hopefully prevent any further spread." Steve
responded not by pressing Parsons to elaborate but by saying, "Well
that's pretty close to what I expected. When will I be able to get out
of the hospital and go home?" Connie smiled and remained silent,
and the conversation focused on Steve's convalescence from surgery.
Before leaving the room, Dr. Parsons asked if they had any questions,
and they said they did not.
   The rest of the week in the hospital was useful to Parsons as she
acquainted herself more fully with Steve and Connie's world: their
children, relatives, friends, and associates from work. These were the
people who would play crucial roles in the adaptive process. Parsons
didn't have much time, but with each daily encounter in Steve's
hospital room, she widened her view of the world she would chal-
lenge with the questions she eventually would ask.
   A month later in her office, after the oncologist gave Steve his first
course of chemotherapy, Parsons raised the first tough question:
"You know, there is always a possibility that the cancer can worsen
in spite of the treatment. If that happens, people frequently don't
survive. Have you two talked about that?" The response was a heavy
silence, during which Parsons held steady, not offering a gesture of
either encouragement or discouragement. After a minute or so, Con-
nie spoke up anxiously, "I've tried to put the worst out of my mind,
but I haven't been able to do that completely." There was a pressured
quality to her speech, "I had a dream the other night in which I was
alone with our kids in a strange town; I was frightened. I haven't
wanted to think about it." Parsons then looked to Steve. "How
about you?" Steve responded quickly, "Yeah, I felt differently when
I went back to work this week. I can't explain it."
   Parsons thought they had made it to first base. The subject could
be discussed; the Buchanans had begun to face it on their own, at
least unconsciously. Furthermore, they seemed to trust Parsons in
their responses. They did not change the subject, or get angry with
her for being pessimistic-indicators of unreadiness. Her relationship
82   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

with them was evidently intact and sufficiently resilient, at least, to
absorb this initial challenge. As a next step, she thought she had to
structure and pace the discussion. If she were to leave it open-ended,
Steve and Connie either might close up tight, not knowing how to
proceed, or break open into a free-flowing expression of their feel-
ings and fears. The first would be a step backwards, and the second
might leave them feeling overwhelmed by their emotions, and con-
sequently less strong and resourceful-qualities they would need in
order to think through the adjustments ahead.
   Parsons took what she thought would be a bearable next step. She
wanted Steve to know that he had a new job to do. At the same
time, she wanted to take some of the burden on her own shoulders.
"Steve, I really want you to get yourself covered at work. You see,
I don't want to be concerned about scheduling treatments and having
to worry about your job. It would be much better for me if you could
hand off your major responsibilities to one of your associates so we
can fight this thing."
   Steve squeezed Connie's hand tightly and smiled half-way, and it
seemed to Parsons that they had achieved a good beginning. The last
thing she had wanted to do was to destroy their hope. Conveying
hope was truthful. Moreover, hope itself served as a powerful spur
to the body's efforts to fight back. It seemed to Parsons that she had
preserved hope at the same time that she had helped the Buchanans
to begin organizing contingency plans for the worst outcome. With
those plans in hand, the worst would never be as bad as those
situations Parsons had seen previously when both patients and doc-
tors joined in persistent denial.
   The next steps were difficult. They required that Parsons continue
to use her authority not to give answers but to hold the Buchanans
in the process of adjustment and learning. Using her authority rela-
tionship, she could contain the stresses that the family would gener-
ate in facing this critical adaptive challenge. As long as the
Buchanans entrusted her with their care, she could shoulder their
pains. Serving as the repository of their pains, she had the power to
manage the pace of giving those pains back-not so fast that the
family would be overwhelmed, and not so slow that they would be
unprepared to meet dying if it were to happen. Because they let her
contain their anxiety, she had the power to manage how they would
eventually work the issues.
                                     Mobiliting Adaptive Work    I   83

   Her capacity to hold was a product of her authority. But her
authority came not simply from the medical community and from
the state licensing board for physicians. All of that formal authority
served as background for the informal authority the Buchanans gave
her. If they lost faith in her efforts, they would find somebody else.
Her formal authority meant nothing without the Buchanans' infor-
mal authorization that came with their trust. And maintaining that
authorization, that trust, depended on meeting their expectations.
   What did they expect? Steve and Connie initially expected Parsons
to provide a cure, to shoulder the problem and solve it. When
Parsons discovered that she probably could not solve the problem,
she changed her mindset from exercising technical expertise to exer-
cising leadership. But changing her own mindset was not enough.
She also had to shift the expectations of her patient and his family.
Otherwise, she would be constrained to operate in the technical
mode, since that is what they initially had expected-remove the
kidney stone. But shifting their expectations is a polite way of saying
that she had to fail their expectations at a rate they could stand.
Fundamentally, she had to fail their expectation that she could pro-
vide a cure. Later on, she would also frustrate their wishes that, for
example, she would know just "what they should tell their children."
   In failing expectations, as we have seen, Parsons took her time and
acted gingerly. In maintaining her authority, she traded off expecta-
tions, failing some while meeting others. She met the expectation for
decision, action, and hope. She also conveyed a sense of order. She
structured and paced the process of adjustment by setting the agenda
in their meetings; and by containing her own feelings, she commu-
nicated calm and control. By all of these means, she kept the level
of distress down within a tolerable range.
   In effect, the dependency changed. The family continued to make
use of Parsons, depending on her for the services just described. But
the dependency differed from what it initially had been when the
family focused solely on getting a technical cure for the illness. Now,
the doctor's inability to provide a cure meant that Steve and his
family would have to develop their own ability to respond to the
problem. What the doctor could not do, the patient would have to
do, or the response would remain inadequate. Thus, in shifting from
the dependence befitting technical situations to the dependence befit-
ting adaptive situations, the patient-the authorizing principal-had
84   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

to develop his own resourcefulness. The dependence on the doctor
changed from looking to her for answers to looking for help in doing
adaptive work.
   In working toward an adaptive solution, doctor and patient broke
the problem situation into definable and more technical components.
The potentially unchanging conditions of the situation were iden-
tified so that those conditions, themselves, were not defined as prob-
lems. This required technical expertise. Cancer and the particular
probability of dying was a condition. Given that condition, some of
the family's problems were technical, Type I. For example, an ac-
countant was hired to solve a set of financial problems. Still, other
parts of the situation could be clearly defined, but no expert could
solve them alone; these were Type II. The family had to learn. For
example, Connie Buchanan had to prepare to return to wage-earning
work. Experts helped, but the choices and adjustments were hers to
make.
   Fourteen months later, Steve died at home surrounded by his
family. From Parsons point of view, there was achievement as well
as failure. She had lost her patient. At the same time, the last year
had been meaningful. The three children spent precious time with
their father; they were given the chance to talk about all sorts of
things that would help them continue to grow up. Connie, having
begun a training program, was gradually getting ready for a job
outside the home. Perhaps more importantly, Steve and Connie had
discussed many intimate questions that strengthened Connie's cour-
age and desire to continue living as fully as she could.

                         Leadership Expertise
The story of Steve and Connie suggests what an authority can do
when the authority does not know the answer. In those situations,
the authority can induce learning by asking hard questions and by
recasting people's expectations to develop their response ability. In
contrast, Plato argues in The Republic that people need a philoso-
pher-king to counteract their ignorance. Using a medical analogy, he
asserts that just as one sensibly turns to a physician to solve a medical
problem, so also should a polity turn to a properly trained philoso-
pher-king to solve problems of public policy.tt
                                      Mobilizing Adaptive Work     / 85

   The notion of leadership developed here departs from Plato's per-
spective in a fundamental way. Plato argues that the expertise re-
quired of leadership is a substantive vision of the good. Yet Dr.
Parsons has no such vision. When she switches from operating as a
technician to operating as an agent of adaptive work, she does not
know what adaptation the Buchanans ought to make. The expertise
that derives from her professional experience tells her that major life
adjustments of some sort are called for; it also provides practical
guidance for stimulating those adjustments. In addition, her technical
expertise gives her information about the medical conditions that are
forcing the adaptive change. But she does not presume to know what
the results should look like. True, she needs expertise, both technical
expertise and leadership expertise. Her actions are nothing if not
expert, but they are expert in the management of processes by which
the people with the problem achieve the resolution.
   Plato misunderstood the kind of expertise required of authorities
because he failed to appreciate the medical difference between tech-
nical and adaptive work. As a consequence, he argued as if a resto-
ration of health were the clear objective in all medical situations, a
vision of the absolute good to which any reader might easily relate.
Indeed, he may have used this analogy precisely because it conveyed
in a concrete way his notion of the absolute good: restoring health.
Who could argue? He then defined leadership essentially as answer-
giving-offering knowledge of the good and how to achieve it.
   However, Steve Buchanan's case suggests that regaining health is
often not the right orienting value. To focus on Steve's health rather
than on Steve and his family's adaptive challenge would have misled
them. Parsons's mode of operating shifted away from ans~er-giving
authority toward the use of her authority to construct a relationship
in which to raise and process tough questions.
   Parsons used leadership and not just technical expertise. 12 She used
her authority relationship like a containing vessel for the family's
learning process. As one would use a pressure cooker, turning the
heat up but keeping it within the carrying capacity of the vessel (its
walls and relief valve), Parsons's authority gave her opportunities to
regulate the levels of stress in the family to keep it within a tolerable
yet productive range. She let pressure out by buffering the news,
focusing on technical remedies, and organizing action. When she
86   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

raised hard questions and left the adaptive work to the family, the
pressure would rise. By deciding what to bring to their attention, she
not only set the agenda, she also regulated stress.
   Parsons helped the Buchanans take responsibility. She neither
shielded them from their problems, nor did she abandon them.
Developing responsibility-the ability to respond-took time and
strategy. A large measure of the Buchanans' work involved emotional
learning. The family had to grapple with the probability of great loss
in order to think clearly and creatively about the specific changes
they needed to make. It would have been wrong for her to assume
that the Buchanans had that ability fully developed to begin with.
They told her quite clearly that they were not ready for the news.
Thus, Parsons began with the assumption that the family had the
potential-the basic capacity-to take responsibility in this new situ-
ation, but likely would need help to employ it.

                             Implications
Although Plato set the precedent, analyzing leadership with a medi-
cal metaphor presents some difficulties. Doctor-patient relationships
differ fundamentally from the relations of business executives, poli-
ticians, and public managers to their respective constituencies. Large
social systems like organizations or polities present the manager with
substantially more complex patterns than does the doctor-patient
dyad. In a medical setting, a problem will lack clarity because the
patient has not yet reasoned and separated the problem into Type I
and II components. In a complex social system, a problem will lack
clarity because a multitude of factions will have divergent opinions
about both the nature of the problem and its possible solutions. One
faction's fix is another faction's adaptive challenge. Competing values
are often at stake. Furthermore, in a large social system the scientific
experts often disagree even on the fundamental outlines of a prob-
lem, particularly at the early stages of problem definition. 13 Each
faction will have its own expert. For example, witness the public
debate about so scientific a question as global warming. Does global
warming present a problem needing attention? Which scientist
should we trust?14
   Moreover, in medical illness, the patient has the problem. But in
                                      Mobilizing Adaptive Work    I 87

organizational and public life, there will be many relevant parties to
a problem, diffusing responsibility for it. The critical strategic ques-
tion becomes: Whose problem is it? And the answer is not so obvi-
ous. For example, who should take responsibility for drug abuse:
police, parents, schools, clergy, taxpayers, the army, or some combi-
nation of these?
   Still, medicine and politics present similar dilemmas. As we turn
to large social systems, three general implications of the Buchanan
story are worth considering. First, an authority figure exercising
leadership has to tell the difference between technical and adaptive
situations because they require different responses. She must ask the
key differentiating question: Does making progress on this problem
require changes in people's values, attitudes, or habits of behavior?
If people recognize the problem and can repeat a well-worked solu-
tion, then she can engage an authoritative response with practical
efficiency and effect. When Steve Buchanan had a kidney stone,
Parsons took command and called in the right specialist to adminis-
ter the cure. In situations that call for adaptive work, however, social
systems must learn their way forward. Even when an authority has
some clear ideas about what needs to be done, implementing change
often requires adjustments in people's lives.
   Hence, with adaptive problems, authority must look beyond
authoritative solutions. Authoritative action may usefully provoke
debate, rethinking, and other processes of social learning, but then
it becomes a tool in a strategy to mobilize adaptive work toward a
solution, rather than a direct means to institute one. When Parsons
told Steve to hand off his major job responsibilities, she took authori-
tative action to provoke his thinking about difficult issues, and not
really to ease the scheduling of treatments.
   As suggested, this requires a shift in mindset. When using authori-
tative provocation as part of a strategy, one must be prepared for an
eruption of distress in response to the provocation and to consider
early on the next step. One has to take the heat in stride, seeing it
as part of the process of engaging people in the issue. In contrast,
the mindset which views authoritative action as a solution to an
adaptive problem would logically view an aggravated community as
an extraneous complication to making headway, rather than an
inherent part of making progress. Operating with that mindset, an
88   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

authority figure would likely respond defensively and inappropri-
ately when the community retaliates.
   Second, the Buchanan story suggests that having an authority
relationship with people is both a resource for leadership and a
constraint. Authority is a resource because it can provide the instru-
ments and power to hold together and harness the distressing process
of doing adaptive work. Authority is a constraint because it is con-
tingent on meeting the expectations of constituents. Deviating from
those expectations is perilous. Had Parsons not carefully monitored
the trust of the family, she might have lost them.
   Third, as learning takes place, Type III situations may be broken
down partially if not completely into Type II and Type I components.
This involves both process and technical expertise. When an author-
ity distinguishes conditions from problems, she can bring tractable
issues to people's attention. By managing attention to issues instead
of dictating authoritative solutions, she allows invention. People
create and sort through alternative problem definitions, clarify value
trade-offs, and test potential avenues of action. Creativity and cour-
age can sometimes transform adaptive challenges into technical
problems by expanding people's technical capabilities.
   For example, Parsons and the Buchanan family transformed the
Type III problem of impending death into Type II and Type I parts.
Steve and Connie started seeing a counselor to help them find a way
to prepare the children. They called an accountant to help clarify
their financial needs. And Connie used a local agency to begin a job
search and professional training.
   The following case illustrates these implications in a large and
public system.

                               Tacoma
On July 12, 1983, the head of the u.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA), William Ruckelshaus, took unprecedented action in
a case involving a copper plant owned by the American Smelting and
Refining Company (Asarco) near Tacoma, Washington. ls The Asarco
plant was the only one in the nation to use copper ore with a high
content of arsenic, and arsenic had been found to cause cancer. As
authorized by Amendments to the Clean Air Act of 1970, Ruck-
                                     Mobilizing Adaptive Work   /   89

elshaus was expected to decide what to do about the plant; in
particular, he had to determine what constituted an "ample margin
of safety" in the plant's operation to protect public health.
   This was both a technically and politically difficult question. In
the years since the 1970 Clean Air Act Amendments had been writ-
ten, scientists were discovering that many hazardous wastes lacked
a clear threshold of safety. Even a minuscule amount of "nonthresh-
old chemicals" could produce adverse effects. As Ruckelshaus put it
in his June 1983 address to the National Academy of Sciences, "We
must assume that life now takes place in a minefield of risks from
hundreds, perhaps thousands, of substances. No more can we tell
the public: You are home free with an adequate margin of safety."
   The Asarco plant had long been regarded as one of the major
polluters in the Northwestern United States, but it had also provided
employment to generations of people since its opening in 1890. By
1983, nearly one hundred years later, the plant employed about 575
workers in the town of Ruston with a payroll of $23 million. It
contributed significantly to the local economy through its purchases
of $12 million worth of supplies, and it provided $13 million of
revenue to auxiliary businesses in addition to paying $3 million in
state and local taxes. If Asarco were to close the plant, the state of
Washington would have to pay as much as $5.5 million in unem-
ployment benefits. Closing the plant would be a devastating blow to
a region where several major industries had not yet recovered from
recession. 16
   Yet the numbers do not fully convey the significance of Asarco to
Tacoma. A texture and a way of life had been woven around the
plant. Seventy-year-old Owen Gallagher, a former mayor of Ruston
and an employee of Asarco for forty-three years, spoke for many
town residents when he told reporters from the Chicago Tribune:
"I've worked in the plant all my life. So have my brothers, and so
have my neighbors. We're not sick. This town was built around that
plant. People came here looking for fire and smoke in the 1900's to
find work. Now the government's complaining about that same
smoke and trying to take our children's livelihood away."
   The Asarco company itself was well aware of the pollution prob-
lem. Under pressure from the regional air pollution authority, Asarco
had spent about $40 million since 1970 in equipment and practices
90   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


to reduce emissions. In the late 1970s they had agreed to install, by
1984, secondary converter hoods at a cost of roughly $4 million to
bring emissions down further. Indeed, the hoods were considered the
best available technology to reduce pollution at a smelter like
Asarco's. Going further would require one of three options: develop
a new technology to reduce emissions; ship in low arsenic ore at high
cost; or convert the entire plant to electric smelting, a different
process altogether, at a projected cost of $150 million.
   According to the company, any of these three options would force
the closing of the plant. World copper prices had crashed between
1980 and 1982 from $..1.45 per pound to 60 cents per pound. To
break even, the Asarco plant required 82 cents per pound, which
meant that at current prices it was losing money already.
   The battle, like many environmental battles, was pitched between
jobs and health. According to the EPA, installing the converter hoods
as planned would reduce the risk of arsenic related cancer from four
persons a year to one. Would this be acceptable? Did an "ample
margin of safety" to protect public health require more? Should
regulations demand zero emissions? Or was the livelihood generated
by the plant worth the added risk of one case of cancer per year?
   Complicating these questions was the fact that the emissions, and
thus the risks of cancer, were spread out over a twelve mile area that
involved people even at a distance from the plant and its jobs. For
example, Vashon Island lay two miles offshore, but because of pre-
vailing winds it became, as one resident put it, "the dumping grounds
for these pollutants without any benefits such as jobs or Asarco tax
payments." Many islanders were afraid of the high levels of arsenic
found in the urine samples of their children and in the soil from their
local gardens. Should they bear the side-effects of Asarco? People in
the city of Tacoma were in the same predicament. Receiving tons of
air pollution a year from the plant, and few tax benefits, one member
of the Tacoma city council said it was as if "somebody [were]
standing on the other side of the city line with a thirty-ought-six
[rifle] and firing it into Tacoma."
   Who should decide? By habit and statute, Ruckelshaus and the
EPA were supposed to decide. The company and many of its workers
looked to the EPA to confirm the acceptability of the actions they
were about to take by spending $4 million on converter hoods. They
                                      Mobilizing Adaptive Work     I 91

were using the best available technology to reduce emissions from
their plant. They looked to the EPA to resist taking action that would
push them economically over the brink. Yet many area residents,
along with environmental activists, looked to the EPA to provide "an
ample margin of safety," and were quite willing to push the plant to
the edge, if not over it, to reduce emissions significantly further.
   Remarkably, Ruckelshaus, on July 12, 1983, refused publicly and
dramatically to decide on his own. Going way beyond the perfunc-
tory public hearings mandated by statute to accompany national
rulemaking, Ruckelshaus proposed to engage the community at large
in facing the problem. He announced the EPA's intention to solicit
actively the views and wishes of the people that would be most
affected by the EPA ruling. "For me to sit here in Washington and
tell the people of Tacoma what is an acceptable risk would be at best
arrogant and at worst inexcusable." As he later told the Los Angeles
Times: "My view is that these are the kinds of tough, balancing
questions that we're involved in here in this country in trying to
regulate all kinds of hazardous substances. I don't like these ques-
tions either, but the societal issue is what risks are we willing to take
and for what benefits?" Ruckelshaus even quoted Thomas Jefferson
to back up his unprecedented stand: "If we think (the people) not
enlightened enough to exercise their control with a wholesome dis-
cretion, the remedy is not to take it from them, but to inform their
discretion. "
   Ernesta Barnes, the EPA's regional administrator in the Northwest,
spoke to the local press as well on July 12. "We ask the public's help
to consider the very difficult issues raised by arsenic air emissions.
Together we must determine what is an 'acceptable' or 'reasonable'
risk to public health from arsenic emissions." She announced that
the usual public hearings would be preceded by "public workshops
and other activities to inform you of the many technical issues
involved."             .
   Few people reacted positively. The press framed the issue starkly:
"What cost a Life? EPA Asks Tacoma" (Los Angeles Times),
"Smelter Workers Have Choice: Keep their Jobs or their Health"
(Chicago Tribune). The New York Times ran an editorial that
branded "Mr. Ruckelshaus as Caesar ... who would ask the amphi-
theater crowd to signal with thumbs up or down whether a defeated
92   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

gladiator should live or die." For Ruckelshaus to "impose such an
impossible choice on Tacomans was ... inexcusable." The head of
the local chapter of the Sierra Club said, "It is up to the EPA to
protect public health, not to ask the public what it is willing to
sacrifice not to die from cancer." In the community's opinion as well,
Ruckelshaus was neglecting his duties. Local citizens called it "cop-
ping out." "We elected people to run our government; we don't
expect them to turn around and ask us to run it for them."
   Ruckelshaus fought back in various encounters with the press. In
a letter to The New York Times, he wrote, "Your Caesar analogy is
seriously flawed. The Roman Caesars asked the crowd for thumbs
up or down before sparing or condemning the gladiator. In Tacoma,
the ones being asked for their reaction are at risk themselves. No
one ever asked the gladiator his opinion, which may be the principal
difference between Rome and the EPA."17 "Listen," he told the Los
Angeles Times, "I know people don't like these kinds of decisions.
Welcome to the world of regulation. People have demanded to be
involved and now I have involved them and they say: 'Don't ask that
question.' What's the alternative? Don't involve them?"
   Resistance to Ruckelshaus also ran high within the EPA itself.
Never before had the agency pushed problems back into the laps of
a community. Like most government officials, managers within the
EPA took seriously their charge to solve problems on behalf of the
public. Indeed, public involvement seemed so messy a process com-
pared with rational and expert decisionmaking that even the public
hearings demanded by law were seen more as a formality to be
suffered than an essential component of the problem-solving process.
As a regional staff member described, "At headquarters [in Wash-
ington, D.C.] they thought we were a bunch of bozos out here in
the region. They could not understand why we were scrambling and
bending over backwards to organize the workshops and put out
easily digestible information for the public."
   As one might expect, the three public workshops held that August
were controversial and packed with people, including a large number
of smelter workers, union representatives, local citizen organizations,
and environmental groups. The first workshop was held on Vashon
Island, and the last two in Tacoma itself. The format was the same
for all three, and all were covered by local and national television.
                                      Mobilizing Adaptive Work     / 93

After a formal presentation by the EPA staff, with graphs and charts
to illustrate the technical facts regarding arsenic emission, dispersion,
and the risk of illness, the audience was divided into smaller groups
to facilitate individual responses. The EPA staff distributed several
handouts with fact sheets, illustrations of how hooding helped con-
trol emissions, and excerpts from Ruckelshaus's National Academy
of Sciences speech which outlined his philosophy (and Jefferson's) of
public education. They then circulated among the groups to answer
questions and record the comments of participants.
   Many of the comments had little to do with verifiable facts. Hired
by the EPA to observe, the dean of the School of Public Health at
the University of Washington remarked on how "the personal nature
of the complaints and questions made a striking counterpoint to the
presentations of meteorological models and health effect extrapola-
tions." People asked whether or not they could eat food from their
Vashon Island gardens, how much soil should they remove to make
it safe, how would their pets be affected. One woman asked, "Will
my child die of cancer?"
   The workshops had both immediate and subtle effects. Immedi-
ately, the EPA and the public learned some lessons. As one analyst
for the EPA described, "We ... got educated. The questions raised
at the workshops sent some people back to the drawing board."
Several public groups asked the EPA to postpone the formal hearings,
scheduled for late August, to allow them more time to prepare
testimony. In the meantime, the public held more workshops on its
own under the sponsorship of the city of Tacoma and the Steel-
worker's Union. Many more questions were raised, and not only
questions about pollution and health, but about other options as
well, like diversifying the local economy. Yet the EPA was still taking
the heat. Some comments bordered on the openly hostile, "I have
seen studies which show that stress is the main source of cancer; the
EPA is one main cause of stress."
   By the time of the hearings in November, the EPA had clarified
several scientific questions raised by the public's involvement. Sig-
nificantly, its computer model estimating the amount of arsenic emis-
sions had been wrong. Yet the corrected model still predicted a risk
of one additional cancer death per year from arsenic, even after
placement of the new hooding devices.
94   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

   The workshops and hearings surprised the staff at the EPA. As
Ruckelshaus put it, local citizens had shown that they were "capable
of understanding [the problem of the smelter] in its complexities and
dealing with it and coming back to us with rather sensible sugges-
tions." In fact, "the public-the non-technical, unschooled public-
came back with some very good suggestions as to how they could
reduce the emissions of arsenic in the plant [and still keep it open]."
   Perhaps of greater import, local people began to see the situation
in a new light. Rather than view it solely as a conflict between jobs
and health, many people began to see a new possibility: the diver-
sification of the local economy. Although no one knew whether or
not the plant would have to close in the near future, many could see
that remaining so dependent on this one struggling industry was a
bad idea.
   No one, including Ruckelshaus, saw the new possibility at the
start. 18 The idea of diversification, although obvious in retrospect,
had not been part of anyone's mindset. The EPA, industry, labor,
environmentalists, and local officials had been thinking in more
narrow terms of emissions, health risks, and jobs. It took the noisy
and conflictive process of public workshops, debates in the press,
and the mobilization of neighborhoods to generate new ideas.
   One year later, in June 1984, although Ruckelshaus had not yet
come to a decision, Asarco announced that it would close the Ta-
coma plant the following year. Precipitated primarily by depressed
copper prices and shortages of high-arsenic copper ore, Asarco nev-
ertheless spread the blame for the shutdown to federal, state, and
local environmental agencies for requiring it to install converter
hoods costing $3 million by the end of that year. Furthermore,
Asarco claimed that the EPA would require a great deal more invest-
ment in the future. Although this was not true, since Ruckelshaus
had not yet made a final ruling, somebody would have to take the
heat, and the EPA was the obvious lightning rod. As one worker told
reporters, "I'll tell you something, it's the EPA's fault!"
   Yet the community, however distressed, was also better prepared
than it might have been. By the time the announcement came in
1984, the new goal had already been set: finding new jobs for the
workers and attracting new industry to the region. When the plant
closed in 1985, Tacoma and Ruston already had begun the task of
                                        Mobilizing Adaptive Work      / 95

diversifying its economy. People had come to the early workshops
displaying buttons labeled either "Jobs" or "Health." By the final
workshops, people were sporting buttons that said "BOTH."
  In retrospect, nearly ten years later, Colin Conant, Executive Di-
rector of the Private Industry Council for Tacoma, looked back on
the efforts of the Dislocated Workers Project for those laid off by
Asarco.
  We created a model for re-training the workforce, and the community
  got behind it. We got many many people involved on advisory com-
  mittees: the labor union, United Way, the Private Industry Council,
  Asarco, the Economic Development Board, employees, and the State
  Employment Security Department. People might do it that way now,
  but back then nobody was. The support made a big difference in how
  well people adjusted. It could have been much more psychologically
  disruptive. There were far fewer casualties than there might have been
  without so many people and organizations backing us up. Since
  Asarco's closing, there have been several more closings in the area and
  we basically applied the same model. We learned a lot from how we
  did it then. 19

  In addition to helping the workers adapt, the Asarco effort also
served as a model in later years for resolving other environmental
disputes in the Tacoma area. According to Doug Sutherland, Mayor
of Tacoma during that time:
  It gave us substantial experience that has helped us in many other
  situations. For example, another major facility in the area is the
  Simpson Paper Mill, which had a problem with water pollution. Well,
  we modified the Asarco process, got all the relevant people involved,
  and it worked beautifully. No law suits. What really came out of this
  [Asarco effort] was a process and a group of people who were used
  to looking at an issue together without taking a litigative approach. 20


                              Implications
Ruckelshaus recognized that the Asarco situation represented an
adaptive challenge rather than a technical problem. Consequently, he
resisted pressures from within the EPA and from the public to pro-
96   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

vide an authoritative solution. Instead, he chose to engage people in
facing the challenge. By doing so, he placed an unusual problem in
the laps of his own agency. The EPA had no real experience in
orchestrating public deliberation. Public hearings routinely had been
pro forma, with presentations of technical arguments by interested
parties and little more. Hearings tended to focus on narrowly defined
issues, without much creativity in exploring new possibilities like
diversifying a local economy. Parties did not talk to one another;
they presented testimony to a panel of EPA administrators and
experts.
   The EPA had never seen itself in the role of orchestrating public
thinking on problems. In the public workshops in Tacoma, it quickly
found itself "over its head" in problems about which its technical
expertise meant little. What could pollution experts say about the
value of jobs versus the value of health, or ways to cope with a
risk-filled life, or paths to economic diversification?
   Bearing the brunt of managing the tasks of informing and involv-
ing the public, the regional EPA office exhausted itself in the under-
taking. Roughly thirty people devoted full time for four months to
this one case. Was it worth it? According to one official, the whole
"process proved terrifically costly and time-consuming." And in the
end, the decision was still the EPA's to make.
   Yet there were at least three significant benefits. First, within the
EPA itself, the staff at headquarters began to appreciate what it
meant to be on the frontlines. Because the regional staff had frequent
contact with area groups, they knew better how to engage with the
public. On arriving in Tacoma, staff from Washington, D.C., had
quickly found themselves out of touch with the real-world import of
scientific findings at the local level. As one regional staff member put
it, "When they arrived in Tacoma and found themselves face-to-face
with a well-informed and often angry public, they began to appre-
ciate our problem a little better." Now, information relevant to
public policymaking would flow up from the frontlines rather than
just down from headquarters. That made policymaking better. Rou-
tine procedures to involve the community began to change. In fol-
lowing years, the EPA began to act as a frequent sponsor and forum
for negotiation among stakeholders to resolve environmental dis-
putes. 21 Furthermore, the agency began routinely to make use of the
                                     Mobilizing Adaptive Work    / 97

central distinction Ruckelshaus had made in Tacoma-between the
science of assessing risk and the problem of managing the public
implications of living with risk. The focus on risk management
broadened the mission of the EPA, giving a larger context to its
previously narrow scientific orientation. 22
   Second, the Tacoma experiment in public deliberation restored the
credibility of the EPA, which in 1983 had just come out of two years
mired in public scandal. The Reagan Administration, entering in
1981, had taken the extreme position that favoring industry meant
opposing environmental protection. Anne Gorsuch Burford, Rea-
gan's first appointee to head the EPA, had stymied every program to
regulate business. She crusaded against the "excesses" of the envi-
ronmentalists and polarized public debate by framing the issue
starkly as a trade-off between jobs and the environment. 23 The result
was a scandal-producing disregard for the mandate of the EPA to
provide environmental protection. The White House was forced to
retreat, and it did so by bringing back William Ruckelshaus. The
EPA's first head administrator in 1970, he had established the
agency's credibility with both environmentalists and the business
community. Now he was back to restore it.
   Less than four months after returning to the EPA, Ruckelshaus
went to Tacoma. As we have seen, instead of being lauded, he was
excoriated initially for shirking his responsibilities. Over time, how-
ever, the Tacoma effort at public involvement made big strides in
terms of credibility. As a member of the Washington Environmental
Council put it, the EPA's cooperation and openness went "a long way
toward restoring trust and confidence in the agency here in the
region." Even previous skeptics of public deliberation later praised
the effort. Ruth Weiner of the Sierra Club, who had criticized
Ruckelshaus earlier for "copping out," stated at the conclusion of
her public testimony that the Clean Air Act "requires public involve-
ment." "Moreover," she said, "in becoming involved, the public
begins to appreciate the difficulty attendant on making regulatory
decision, the ease with which EPA can be made a scapegoat because
the agency's blunders are so readily magnified, and the inadequacy
of simply identifying 'heroes' and 'villains' in environmental protec-
tion. It may have been hard work and a headache for all of us, but
the public involvement is most certainly worth it."
98   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

   Third, and perhaps most significantly, the communities of Tacoma
and Ruston began seeing the need to adapt. Certain facts were now
being faced. Asarco's use of outdated technology in its Ruston plant
made it only sporadically competitive in the world copper market.
The town's reliance on a single industry placed it in a precarious
position of dependence. In addition, some people were paying the
price of the plant in terms of health, yet without benefit from jobs
or tax revenues.
   With the advantage of hindsight, we can see these benefits of
public engagement. However, when Ruckelshaus broke precedent by
involving the public in solving its problem, he met resistance from
every quarter: industry, environmental interests, labor, the press, and
within the EPA itself. With problems as tough as jobs, health, and
economic diversification, it is no wonder that everyone expects
authority to make the decision. That seems our inclination-to look
to someone or some agency to take the heat in choosing what to do.
Ordinarily, these expectations act as constraints on people in author-
ity, inhibiting them from exercising leadership. Yet Ruckelshaus cut
against the grain when he insisted that the public realize that the job
of regulating pollutants was not simply a technical matter of setting
safe thresholds of emission. Trade-offs would have to be made that
involved value conflicts not amenable to sCIentific analysis. And if
those trade-offs between jobs and health were to be faced, then
perhaps new adaptations might be achieved in the face of loss.24
   Ruckelshaus insisted that these problems represented challenges to
business-as-usual. At the very least, public attitudes toward living
with risk had to change. Otherwise, agencies like the EPA would
continue to be called upon to do the impossible, to provide fixes for
what could not be fixed by fiat from above. Hard choices were
necessary, requiring people to clarify and change their values. The
EPA could stimulate those changes but it could not make them.
   The technical experts within the EPA played a central role. They
provided information regarding the conditions requiring an adaptive
response. Their expertise was crucial in distinguishing the technical
from the adaptive facets of the problem and for clarifying the
choices. How much arsenic would be contained by a secondary
hooding device, and how much would that reduce the risk of cancer?
How did those estimates compare with other plant modifications?
                                        Mobilizing Adaptive Work      I 99

How much income to the community would be lost if the plant
closed? Framing and answering these and many other questions
required technical expertise essential to the community's problem-
solving. Surely in most situations, as in this one, experts are necessary
to tease out the complex relationship between an adaptive problem
and its technical components, but only if they see the difference.
   Ruckelshaus did see the difference. He provoked an adaptive re-
sponse, not only in Tacoma, and not only within the EPA, but in the
nation. The events in Tacoma stimulated a national debate on how
to manage environmental risk in which people began to learn about
the enormous costs of "cleaning up" the environment. They had
been pushed to face realities that would require all sorts of invention
and adjustment. But the task of mobilizing an adaptive response was
not easy. Nearly everyone resisted. After leaving the EPA, Ruck-
elshaus looked back on his experiment:
  Perhaps I underestimated how difficult it would be to get people to
  take responsibility, to educate themselves and one another about such
  a difficult issue. Probably not more than a relatively few citizens of
  Tacoma learned that for issues like this there is no "right" answer ...
  They would have to decide what they wanted for their community.
  They would have to determine their own future. But even if a handful
  learned this lesson, then you have the basis for others learning it. You
  have the beginnings of a tradition of public deliberation about hard
  issues. And you also have all the other people in the country who
  watched what happened there in Tacoma, and indirectly learned the
  same lesson. 25

   The stories of both Barbara Parsons and William Ruckelshaus
suggest a strategy of leadership consisting of several principles. I
introduce them here and return to them shortly. First, they identified
the adaptive challenge-the gap between aspirations and reality-
and focused attention on the specific issues created by that gap.
Recognizing that they were working with a problem that existing
technical expertise could not solve satisfactorily, they shifted from
giving authoritative solutions to a plan for managing people's adap-
tive problem-solving.
    Second, they regulated the level of distress caused by confronting
the issues. They paced the rate of challenge and gave structure to the
100   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

process. This was not just a matter of planning and then implement-
ing the plan by force of their authority. Ruckelshaus and Parsons
had to improvise as each of their actions generated information
about the capacity of people to engage the issues and learn.
   Third, they kept attention focused on relevant issues. For Parsons,
that meant a whole sequence of problems demanding attention. For
Ruckelshaus, it meant focusing attention within the EPA on the need
to manage risk, rather than merely assess it scientifically. It meant
challenging the nation to come to terms with the realities of environ-
mental risk, rather than imagine quixotically that risk could be
eliminated altogether.
    Finally, Parsons and Ruckelshaus devised a strategy that shifted
responsibility for the problem to the primary stakeholders. In doing
so, they had to change people's expectations of authority and basis
of trust.
   Both of these people had considerable resources with which to
exercise leadership. Their authority not only constrained them but
also provided them with several kinds of power. Our discussion so
far has suggested some of the dimensions and applications of their
power, but a fuller investigation of the resources of authority is
essential. A person intent on leading must know the tools at her
disposal.
                                  5
                   Applying Power

To lead from a position of authority requires knowing how to tend
and deploy the power that comes with the position. Authority can
be divided into two forms: formal and informal. With formal author-
ity come the various powers of the office, and with informal author-
ity comes the power to influence attitude and behavior beyond
compliance. 1 Formal authority is granted because the officeholder
promises to meet a set of explicit expectations (job descriptions,
legislated mandates), whereas informal authority comes from prom-
ising to meet expectations that are often left implicit (expectations
of trustworthiness, ability, civility).
   The relationship between these forms of authority is easily seen in
the case of an elected official. Before her election, a candidate will
focus on increasing her informal authority-the respect, admiration,
and trust of prospective constituents. Her hope is to transform that
trust into the formal authority of office. Yet even after she gains office
and the powers that come with it, she still has to monitor her
informal authority-her popularity-since it remains a critical source
of her authority. It will determine not only her prospects for reelec-
tion but also her ability to influence fellow officials while still in
office. If her colleagues see that she is weak, they can more easily
ignore her.
   So her informal authority derives not only from her popularity
among her constituents but also from the respect, trust, admiration,
and fear of her colleagues. Gaining power requires that she also gain
                                   101
102   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

informal authority from her political associates. Whether or not they
pay her much mind depends on their own estimate of what she could
do to them and for them. In large measure, she gains influence with
them by extending her authority informally even to their constitu-
ents. If they think she is something special, then her colleagues will
have to pay attention. They will listen because their own constituents
are listening. 2
   Formal authorization brings with it the powers of an office, but
informal authorization brings with it the subtle yet substantial power
to extend one's reach way beyond the limits of the job description.
Formal authority changes in quantum jumps at discrete moments in
time when formal mandates for action are given: at swearing-in,
hiring, firing, signing of legislation, issuance of a license. In contrast,
informal authority changes constantly as one's popularity and pro-
fessional reputation rise and fall.
   For example, as a public manager, William Ruckelshaus had to
meet the mandate of an EPA administrator set forth by Congress in
order to protect his authority. If he were to violate that mandate, he
would risk public humiliation and scandal, as had his predecessor,
Anne Gorsuch Burford.
   Ruckelshaus had to assure the public that he would meet their
expectations as well. Without regaining the public's trust in the
agency, he knew that he would have very little informal authority
with which to get the interested parties to pay attention to the
agency's findings and rulings and cooperate with them. Thus, his
informal authority meant as much as formal authority from Con-
gress. Without informal authority, he would be unsuccessful in ad-
dressing controversial issues.
   The relationship between formal and informal authority is illus-
trated as well by the relationship of Barbara Parsons to her patients.
By choosing her, patients agreed formally to an exchange of services
for compensation. They authorized Parsons to be their physician.
Surrounding and buttressing that formal transaction, the law set
standards of medical care. If Parsons neglected her patients according
to those standards, she would risk a malpractice suit. Were she to
lose her license for failing to meet the expectations of the state
licensing board, she would be forced to close her office.
   Yet much of Parsons's power came from neither her formal ar-
                                              Applying Power    I   103

rangements with her patients nor the state licensing board. Her
power to mobilize her patients to face hard problems came from the
power of informal authority conferred by their trust. If her style or
her recommendations disappointed that trust, her patients might
leave her practice and find another doctor. Or, if leaving were too
difficult because, for example, the costs of leaving Parsons's health
maintenance organization were too high, they might ignore her pre-
scriptions altogether.

              Authority as a Resource for Leadership
Let's examine further the Buchanan and Tacoma cases to develop a
framework for assessing strategic assets for mobilizing adaptive
work. I summarize them in the context of the medical situation. In
that case, Parsons's formal and informal authority gave her an array
of capabilities.
   First, her relationship with the Buchanans provided a holding
environment for containing the stresses of their adaptive efforts. She
was expected to offer a pair of arms that could help hold the burden.
In turn, holding the burden enabled her to deploy the various other
forms of power that came with her authority. The holding environ-
ment provided the foundation for everything else she did.
   Second, Parsons could command and direct attention. The family
looked to her for a diagnosis of the problem and a plan for address-
ing it.
   Third, because she was expected to make decisions on direction,
Parsons was given access to information-a vantage point from
which to look into the family's lives. They revealed themselves to her.
   Fourth, as a result of that privileged access, Parsons had some
control over the flow of information. She could sequence facts about
the illness or issues of dying based on her assessment of the family's
resilience.
   Fifth, attention and access to information brought her the power
to frame issues-to influence the terms of the family's discussions
among themselves. They looked to her for understanding.
   Sixth, because she was expected to maintain order, she was given
numerous means to orchestrate conflict and contain disorder. For
example, she could structure family meetings to discuss contentious
104   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

issues. And she could arbitrate disputes among her professional
colleagues in a location distant from patients to keep these technical
disagreements from distracting them.
   Seventh, as a corollary to containing disorder, authority provided
Parsons with the power to choose the decisionmaking process itself,
be it consultative, autocratic, consensual, or some variation.
   Her powers were limited, but these were the tools Parsons had to
work with.


                Managing the Holding Environment
The Buchanans gave Dr. Parsons the authority to hold them in a
treatment process. Not only could she, in a literal sense, hold their
hands but emotionally she could hold their attention. The Buchanans
made her a key part of the holding environment within which to
contain and channel the stresses they produced by their adaptive
efforts.
   The term "holding environment" originated in psychoanalysis to
describe the relationship between the therapist and the patient. The
therapist "holds" the patient in a process of developmental learning
in a way that has some similarities to the way a mother and father
hold their newborn and maturing children. 3 For a child, the holding
environment serves as a containing vessel for the developmental
steps, problems, crises, and stresses of growing up. Within the pa-
rental hold, the child's growth can be protected and guided. For the
patient in psychotherapy, the therapist's relationship is a place to
examine and make progress on hard problems. To be effective,
therapists have to empathize and understand their patients' struggles
so that the patients can begin to see more clearly the nature of their
problems. That requires both technical knowledge and process ex-
pertise. In my terms, the therapist helps the patient transform Type
III problems into more discrete and readily definable Type II prob-
lems. For example, a man who complains initially of being depressed
about everything learns that he has specific reasons to be angry,
frustrated, and sad.
   For my purposes, I extend the use of the term "holding environ-
ment" beyond parental and therapeutic relationships. A holding
environment consists of any relationship in which one party has the
                                              Applying Power    /   105

power to hold the attention of another party and facilitate adaptive
work. I apply it to any relationship which has a developmental task
or opportunity-including the relationships between politicians and
their polities, nations and other nations, coaches and their teams,
managers and subordinates, and even relationships between friends.
   The holding environment can generate adaptive work because it
contains and regulates the stresses that work generates. For example,
a friend who listens with empathy to a painful story or who can tell
a joke that fits the moment will provide respite and perspective that
buffers distress. The friendship is a holding environment. Social
structures and hopeful visions of the future during times of hardship
reduce social distress: Franklin Roosevelt and the programs of the
New Deal provided a holding environment for the nation during the
Great Depression.
   The holding environment of the doctor-patient relationship con-
sists primarily of bonds of trust, but in other authority relationships
it includes bonds of fear, mutual need, and brute force or its threat.
The walls and bars of a prison, or the locked doors of a mental
hospital, or the threat of international force all potentially provide
holding environments to contain people and the stresses they gener-
ate and express. Even enemy relationships can generate holding
environments. At the end of hostilities, the allies of World War II
provided an extraordinary holding environment for the reconstruc-
tion of Germany and Japan. The American coalition during the
Persian Gulf Crisis of 1990-91 set decisive limits on the means Iraq
could use to solve its domestic problems of economic and social
development. Invading Kuwait went too far. The relationships forged
during the crisis helped structure a holding environment for postwar
development and peacemaking in the Middle East.
   Thus, holding environments formed initially by purely coercive
means can provide a potent way to transform stresses into adaptive
change. Sometimes they provide the only possible way. Other times,
however, coercive relationships temporarily suppress unwanted be-
haviors without accomplishing the work of changing the attitudes,
habits, and relationships that cause the behavior. They fail to develop
into holding environments.
   Indeed, the opportunity for adaptive work is often squandered
within both noncoercive and coercive authority relationships. Char-
106   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

ismatic authority relationships can degenerate into mutual depend-
encies that erode critical judgment on both sides. Doctors may hold
the attention of their patients, yet neglect to raise important ques-
tions about patients' lifestyles. Prisoners held tightly behind bars
sometimes face themselves and change, but many just harden fur-
ther. 4 The victors in a war may leave the defeated to rot and fester,
rather than address the causes of war.
   Parsons's relationship with the Buchanans provided an essential
holding environment that supplemented the family's support net-
work. Steve and Connie Buchanan's psychological resilience was
bolstered by a host of relationships, and by the daily routine of their
lives. Regularity at home and at work helped make the new unpre-
dictability of illness tolerable. Preparing the kids for school, arrang-
ing their after-school activities, shopping, cooking, earning a living
all helped orient the family in a time of great confusion. Friends,
colleagues, religious faith, and the demands of Steve's customers also
helped keep the family from being paralyzed by the enormity of the
challenge ahead. Having Dr. Parsons to trust and rely upon for
information, guidance, perspective, and sympathy gave the Bucha-
nans additional strength.
   Of course, the point of the holding environment provided by
Parsons and others was not to eliminate stress but to regulate and
contain stress so that it did not overwhelm. People cannot learn new
ways when they are overwhelmed. But eliminating the stress alto-
gether eliminates the impetus for adaptive work. The strategic task
is to maintain a level of tension that mobilizes people.
   To return to our pressure-cooker metaphor, the cook regulates the
pressure of the holding environment by turning the heat up or down,
while the relief valve lets off steam to keep the pressure within a safe
limit. If the pressure goes beyond the carrying capacity of the vessel,
the pressure cooker can blow up. On the other hand, with no heat
nothing cooks.
   Parsons constructed a pressure cooker made from relationships of
informal authority derived primarily from trust. If trust had been
weak, she would have had to reduce the pressure, perhaps by delay-
ing bad news. If trust were strong, she could afford to turn up the
heat by introducing a tough problem. Trust provided a critical re-
source, and she had to tend to it fastidiously.
                                                 Applying Power I      107

   To build trust, we need to know what generates it. Trust in
authority relationships is a matter of predictability along two dimen-
sions: values and skill. Quite sensibly, people often expect consistent,
predictable values and problem-solving skills from their authorities.
Without a large measure of predictability in social life, civilization
itself would not be possible. For social living to succeed, we all need
to believe that our social structures and relationships will perform
predictably in keeping with the norms to which we ourselves sub-
scribe.
   Numerous scientific and historical studies demonstrate the conse-
quences of unpredictability.5 In various animal and human experi-
ments, unpredictable painful events are more distressing than
predictable ones. They produce, for example, more ulcers and re-
ports of anxiety. 6 In the history of southern Italy, the rise and strength
of the mafia can be traced to the policies of the seventeenth-century
Spanish throne, which destroyed the political and economic norms
and structures of the region. By provoking feuds within the central
regional government, encouraging payoffs within the justice system,
and shattering norms of trust and cooperation in the marketplace,
Spain extracted money in the short-term while setting in motion the
economic collapse and the disintegration of a regional community
that persists to this day. As one scholar describes, "Distrust perco-
lates through the social ladder, and the unpredictability of sanctions
generates uncertainty in agreements, stagnation in commerce and
industry, and a general reluctance towards impersonal and extensive
forms of cooperation. Sicilians-as everyone knows-do not trust
the state: beyond the boundaries of limited clusters, they often end
up distrusting each other as well."7
   The trust that causes one individual to authorize another requires
more than predictability alone, however. The victims of repeated
extortion would find their local mayor predictable but untrust-
worthy. Authorities are expected to be competent in providing pro-
tection, direction, and order in the interests of their constituents. The
trust that produces authorization requires predictability in the deliv-
ery of necessary services at an acceptable cost. Trust has two com-
ponents: predictable values and predictable skills.
   To trust Parsons, the Buchanan family needed to feel that she had
their interests at heart and would not take advantage of them. She
108   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

had to have the right values. They expected her not to abuse their
vulnerability, for example, by introducing surprise increases in fees.
That did not mean that they expected her to be self-sacrificing.
Having a generous spirit did not preclude either gaining personal
satisfaction or a good income from her doctoring. What mattered
was not that she would forgo her own needs but that she cared about
providing for theirs.
   Tapping that source of trust was rarely problematic for Parsons.
She enjoyed caring for her patients and making a good living. Of
course, she drew limits to protect her own personal needs; she had
to be clear about her limits so that patients could predict her un-
availability. For example, she would not make herself available to
her patients every night or every weekend. But if she accepted a
patient into her practice-which meant that she accepted the pa-
tient's grant of authority-she took it as part of her trust to ensure
when she was unavailable that another doctor would take her place,
fully informed about the patient's specific situation.
   With some patients, however, the stresses generated by illness
sometimes made them demand more than Parsons would give. In
those cases, Parsons had the difficult task of frustrating patients'
demands without losing their trust. Usually, she could talk this
through with them successfully. Often, these conversations provided
an opportunity to help patients see that their anxieties were getting
the best of them, that they were losing sight of their strengths and
their ability to call other resources into action. For example, some
patients would hesitate to calion family, friends, colleagues, and
other professionals. Usually, given the limits of her knowledge and
ability, Parsons could help arrange additional services or facilitate
drawing on family and friends by calling them in herself and break-
ing the ice on a hard conversation.
   On rare occasions, however, she could not foster her patients'
abilities to mobilize their resources to contain distress, and they
would demand more than she could give. In those cases, she lost
their trust and the authority that went with it. The patients went
elsewhere.
   With the Buchanans, Parsons did not have the problem of "nego-
tiating" how her caring would be perceived. Not only did her repu-
tation precede her, but she had a history going back ten years with
                                                Applying Power /      109

this family. Her availability fell within the range of their expectations,
so that having access to her never became the prime indicator of her
trustworthiness in their eyes. They respected that Parsons had a life
of her own. They were willing to work with substitutes in her
absence. They knew she cared.
   But the basis of their trust was more complicated. Initially the
Buchanans trusted Parsons partially for the wrong reasons. In her
relationship with the family, trust depended not only on the percep-
tion that she cared but also on the perception that she could fix the
problem, as she had arranged to do ten years earlier when Steve
Buchanan had a kidney stone. She had to change that expectation
subtly and slowly from "the doc will take care of this problem for
us" to "the doc may not have all the answers, but she's on our side
and she's helping us deal with the problem." Parsons's strategic
dilemma, therefore, was strengthening trust when trust depended on
meeting the unrealistic expectation of a cure.
   How fast Parsons could change the expectations of her patients
would have three broad determinants: (1) the severity of the adaptive
challenge and the stress it generated, (2) the resilience of the patients
and their support system, and (3) the strength of the holding envi-
ronment her authority provided for containing and channeling the
stress of the challenge.
   Parsons regulated the level of stress by pacing and sequencing the
flow of information about the illness and the adaptive tasks that she
surmised would follow, and by organizing support services that
would meet various specific needs (family, religious, and financial).
The more they trusted her abilities (by reputation, prior acquain-
tance, and current association), the more of their distress she could
contain within the doctor-patient relationship. Thus, a stronger pro-
fessional relationship would permit her to push them faster to con-
front reality: its trade-offs, challenges, and uncertainties. Pacing
consisted of gauging the correlation between how much pressure the
family could stand and how much pressure the next piece ofadaptive
work would generate.
   Starting from the time of her first encounter with the Buchanans
after surgery, Parsons listened intently to assess Steve's and Connie's
psychological resilience. She observed how family and friends gath-
ered and talked. She looked for clues to the carrying capacity of the
110   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

family and its network of support. When she began to broach the
need for contingency plans in the event of death, she listened to their
questions and responses, including the nature of their dreams at
night, to gauge how much stress they could contain with the help of
her holding. Her actions served two functions at once: they directed
attention to the adaptive work issues, and they "tested the waters"-
the current resilience of the system. If the family had balked at her
questions, she would wonder if she was pushing too hard.
   Part of the know-how Parsons required was inner discipline, poise.
She had to have the emotional capacity to tolerate uncertainty, frus-
tration, and pain. 8 She had to be able to raise questions about
preparing for the possibility of death without getting too anxious
herself. The Buchanans would carefully observe the nonverbal cues
to Parsons's own emotional ability to deal with the issues she would
ask them to address. If she were to communicate uneasiness in her
body language or tone of voice, for example by fidgeting, stumbling
for words, backing out of the conversation, or breaking into a sweat,
she would communicate a lack of trustworthiness. If she could not
carryon painful conversations with competence, then how could
they?9

Tacoma. The Tacoma case illustrates the tasks of the holding envi-
ronment in a political setting. As we have seen, Ruckelshaus came
back in March 1983 to head an agency that had lost its public
credibility. Ruckelshaus had to reconstruct the government's primary
vessel for working on the country's conflicts over environmental
issues. In 1981 he had said that "the role of the EPA Administrator
in the 1980s should be that of an educator."lo But education re-
quired trust. Only by restoring bonds of trust could he stimulate
people to make hard choices between health and jobs. Only by
restoring credibility in the agency could he make formal rulings and
pronouncements that would stick. Otherwise, environmentalists, in-
dustry, and local citizens affected by pollution would make end runs
around him to Congress, state legislatures, and other governmental
offices to champion their causes. He would lose the capacity to
moderate their conflicting claims.
   Going to Tacoma with an open and public appeal to grapple with
the complexities of arsenic pollution, health risks, and jobs, Ruck-
                                              Applying Power    I   III

leshaus surprised and perhaps shocked local citizens and interest
groups. They were not used to being included in decisionmaking
except in a perfunctory way. Indeed, at first they did not trust or
appreciate Ruckelshaus's actions. Disturbing people seemed a pecu-
liar way to restore confidence in the EPA. Surely, it was a high-risk
strategy.
   Ruckelshaus used a variety of means to contain the distress gen-
erated by asking members of the public to face their problem. Fore-
most, he drew upon the informal authority he had gained as the EPA's
first administrator. His reputation as an honest broker of public
policy gave him the benefit of the doubt. People might be shocked
by his action in Tacoma, but they would nevertheless pay attention.
They knew where he had stood in the past. They might be highly
skeptical, but not highly cynical. Moreover, Ruckelshaus could count
on local reserves of credibility from having lived in the Tacoma area
together with his earlier service as vice-president at Weyerhauser, the
giant timber company nearby. He was no stranger from Washington,
D.C.
   In addition to relying on his reputation, Ruckelshaus took specific
actions to increase trust. He went to Tacoma; people knew to whom
they were talking. The government was not some amorphous and
impersonal bureaucracy. People could feel more securely held amidst
the controversy over the plant because they could actually see the
person in charge. Furthermore, the EPA earned trust by reasoning
with the public. The agency treated the public with respect by offer-
ing workshops to openly discuss the bases for decision. Even though
the EPA challenged the community's reasoning, the officials in the
regional offices showed themselves to be trustworthy because they
responded undefensively to the scientific and human questions that
the community raised in those workshops. Indeed, the EPA recalcu-
lated several scientific findings as a result of the public's critical
response. No one could accuse the agency of trying to "pull a fast
one." By insisting that the people themselves were in the best position
to clarify these hard choices between jobs and health, the agency
demonstrated respect and care for the people and earned their trust.
   Unlike Parsons, however, Ruckelshaus did not rely solely on trust
and respect to construct a holding environment. He also had formal
powers derived from his authorization by Congress and the President
112   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

with which to threaten recalcitrant factions with regulation. These
coercive powers increased the public's concern and widened the
interest in coming to meetings to engage in the process the EPA had
designed. He could simply close down the factory, or, alternatively,
let it dump its contents freely into the air and sea, at least until
another public agency might intervene. His powers, held in restraint,
helped keep people inside the pressure cooker.
   Within the EPA itself, Ruckelshaus's reputation gave him enough
credibility to contain the agency's own distress in being pushed to
undertake a decision process with which it had little experience. For
example, Ernesta Barnes, the EPA's administrator for the region that
included Tacoma, disagreed with him on the role the government
should play in problems like these. She felt that people elect and
appoint officials to make and implement the tough decisions, not to
refer them back to the public.!! She was by no means alone in this
opinion. Yet Barnes was also a close friend of Ruckelshaus and had
trusted him over the years. She gave him the benefit of the doubt.
Had she not trusted him, she might have done what many an official
will do when facing a dubious directive from an untrusted superior:
stall, dampen, and counteract the directive. Not only did Barnes go
along but she devoted an enormous amount of her staff's energy and
time to get it done right.
   Of course, Ruckelshaus's formal authority within the EPA helped
as well. He could and did order the agency to involve the public
more fully in their rulemaking. His informal authority was a critical
resource, but his formal powers provided necessary, decisive lever-
age.
   During the proceedings, the public workshops served as a holding
environment to contain highly charged discussions. These work-
shops provided structure; such details as time and location of meet-
ings, placement of chairs, and size of the rooms all mattered. A few
people in a big room may not feel sufficiently held to face conflictive
points of view and to listen. Failing to set definite starting and
stopping times for meetings may encourage people to wander in and
out, rather than stay in place participating. Chairs set up in a circle
encourages more participation than auditorium-style seating, where
everyone is looking to the front of the room for guidance and
answers. How to arrange chairs at each point in the problem-solving
                                               Applying Power    I   113

process, when to break up the large group into small groups, were
among the detailed structural questions that had to be addressed by
the EPA, with very little experience from which to draw. Although
the staff had held numerous public hearings, they had never con-
structed this sort of holding environment before. 12 Yet they caught
on fast. By breaking the workshop into small groups, they made the
discussions easier to manage. By focusing on their scientific findings,
they communicated their expertise in the field and earned respect.
And by taking seriously the questions raised by the public, they
demonstrated respect for the competence of the public and earned
its trust.
   Although constructing and managing holding environments for
transforming stress into work is a central task of leadership from
positions of authority, it is not the only task. Authority also provides
resources to: (1) direct attention to the issues, (2) gather and test
information-perform reality testing, (3) manage information and
frame issues, (4) orchestrate conflicting perspectives, and (5) choose
the decisionmaking process.


                         Directing Attention
Attention is the currency of leadership. Getting people to pay atten-
tion to tough issues rather than diversions is at the heart of strategy.
Because the Buchanan family looked to Parsons for direction, she
had the power to direct their attention to the questions she thought
they needed to face. Furthermore, she could diminish the odds that
they would distract themselves with peripheral issues. Being at the
focal point of attention, of course, can also be dangerous. She could
be scapegoated by a family-used as a distraction. A patient's family
may say, "The problem is not the medical condition, the problem is
that we have the wrong doctor."
   Of course, the patient may be right. The doctor may be incompe-
tent. Blaming the doctor is not always a form of work avoidance.
But for people faced with harsh realities, the strong temptation to
scapegoat authority may prevent critical thinking about the causes
of the problem or the routes to meeting the challenge.
   Given this dynamic, the authority's strategic task is to redirect
attention from her person and role to the issues that are generating
114   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

distress. Parsons accomplished this by shifting attention away from
the technical issues of medical treatment and directing it toward the
hard questions of adaptive change, at a rate the Buchanans could
tolerate. This was a dynamic process. As their trust increased and
her hold on them strengthened, Parsons's relationship with the family
bolstered their resilience and accelerated the rate at which she could
shift their attention.
   Ruckelshaus faced a similar challenge. His authority gave him the
power to command attention. He could make a public display and
find the cameras whirring about him. The media covered him widely.
His pronouncements captured people's thoughts because the powers
that came with his formal authority and the influence that came with
his informal authority made people look and listen.
   By turning himself into a lightning rod of attention, however, he
risked being electrocuted by the press, the public, and his own
agency. No one liked the idea of turning the choice of jobs versus
cancer back to the community. Consequently, Ruckelshaus faced a
dilemma: if he applied the instruments of his office to provoke work,
he would have to take the heat.
   Yet taking the heat was part of the strategy. Without it, Ruckels-
haus could not have made his point to the nation. Being the focal
point of attention gave him the power to direct attention to the issue
he framed: citizens had to make their own trade-offs between jobs
and health, or discover an alternative. They could not look for a
technical answer to an adaptive problem.


                            Reality Testing
People in authority positions are expected to provide answers to
problems of direction, protection, and order because they are ex-
pected to know. They are expected to have or to mobilize the exper-
tise to solve the particular problems at hand. The doctor is expected
to examine and listen to the patient and conduct laboratory tests to
determine the illness. Scientists of the Environmental Protection
Agency are expected to investigate the production and toxicity of
industrial pollutants, as well as the industry's role in the local econ-
omy and way of life.
   Because authorities are expected to know, they are given access to
                                              Applying Power    I   115

information. The doctor is authorized to pry into the patient's private
life, touch his body, and order tests that allow her to see inside. She
is given license by the patient's family to ask questions of them as
well. EPA officials may have a harder time getting access to industry,
yet compliance with the agency's investigative authority is the rule
rather than the exception.
   Authority figures are supposed to be agents of reality testing: they
are supposed to investigate problems more objectively than people
in the problems' grasp. By virtue of their authority, they are given a
special vantage point from which to survey and understand the
situation. They can compare different sources of evidence. Yet being
responsible for reality testing puts them at risk when their constitu-
ents do not want to know the facts or hear contrary points of view.
Often people want to hear good news, and their resilience for hearing
bad news will determine the rate at which an authority figure can
challenge them with it.
   Access to information, therefore, does not translate directly into
latitude for taking action. An authority may be given wide access to
diagnostic data without a clear authorization to communicate it. In
leading, one has to communicate with subtlety, taking into account
the particularities of the constituents, their networks of support, and
the harshness of the news.



             Managing Information and Framing Issues
Parsons was more than a conduit for information. Part of her job
consisted of deciding which issues her patients were ready to face
and then framing those issues so that her patients could proceed.
Because patients sometimes raise issues in subtle, barely conscious
ways, Parsons faced the major interpretive task of identifying which
issues were close enough to the surface to warrant discussion and
which were as yet unripe. Should she help surface the children's issue,
the marital issues, the financial issue, or the professional issues?
   Parsons would not be the only conduit and interpreter of infor-
mation; there would be other sources in the system, including other
health professionals. But while the Buchanans would gather infor-
mation from other sources, professional and personal, Parsons's po-
116   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


sition as primary physician meant that her words would be given a
special hearing.
   Life for Ruckelshaus was not quite as simple. There were many
sources of information from other organizations about environ-
mental issues besides those within his domain at the EPA. Conse-
quently, he had much less control than Parsons over the content and
flow of information reaching his constituents. Yet by virtue of his
position, people tended to look to him to frame the issues as they
emerged in the public domain. He had some power to pick the issues
that he thought were ripe or should ripen, and he had the power to
frame those issues. To a significant degree, he could determine the
direction of public debate. The task was to frame issues so that
people would comprehend the opportunity and challenge to them.
In going to Tacoma, he chose to ripen and frame the issue of com-
munity responsibility for living with risk, which he termed environ-
mental risk management for the debate that ensued within the EPA
itself.
   The ripeness of an issue is determined primarily by identifying
which issues are currently generating a widespread feeling of urgency.
The central question is: Has the issue fastened in people's minds?
The basic strategic logic is as follows: People are more likely to pay
attention to arguments and perspectives about which they feel some
urgency. Urgency, well framed, promotes adaptive work. If, as is
often the case, there are several urgent issues in a community, then
one has to weigh the competing issues to determine which should be
tackled in what sequence. Unless there are compelling reasons to
begin with an unripe issue, a person in authority would begin with
those issues that have already fastened in people's minds. There is
no science to this. In real-time, one makes an educated guess, tests
how the issue is received, and then reassesses its appropriateness. If
only a small faction is urgent about a problem, but one agrees from
one's vantage point that the problem the faction sees should be
confronted sooner than later, the strategic challenge will be to find
ways to generate more generalized urgency, and thus ripen the issue.
Of course, the most direct way to ripen the issue will be for the
authority figure to take authoritative action on it, which draws
immediate attention to it, but at the cost of attention to other
issues. 13 By orchestrating nationwide publicity for his trip to Tacoma,
                                                 Applying Power    / 117

Ruckelshaus opened one issue at the expense of issues like acid rain
and ozone depletion. If the person in authority is not prepared to
limit his freedom to manage attention to a range of issues, he will
either have to wait or find alternative ways to bring attention to the
issue without placing himself at the focal point of attention. We
return shortly to the implications of this logic.
   President Clinton's first days in office illustrate, in part, the impor-
tance of gauging the ripeness of problems. With a wide agenda of
issues, some of which were very ripe in the society (the budget deficit,
a sluggish economy, health policy) and others for which urgency was
not generalized (gays in the military), Clinton took action across the
spectrum. Authoritative presidential action, of course, ripens issues
quickly. When Clinton announced that by executive action he would
lift the ban on gays in the military, it immediately became a national
issue. But it also expended informal authority needed for other issues
more challenging to Congress and the nation, such as raising taxes,
closing defense industries, restructuring the health care system, and
cutting federal benefits. 14

                Orchestrating Conflicting Perspectives
The leadership of adaptive work usually requires the orchestration
of conflict, often multiparty conflict. Parsons's authority provided
her with two key resources for resolving conflict: the right to mediate
and the power to arbitrate. Among the family, her authority enabled
her to play a mediating role. As a respected outsider, she had the
power to call the family into her office and bring to the surface
conflicting views about how they should respond to Steve's illness.
When Connie and Steve disagreed about how to prepare the children
for his death, Parsons was able to mediate between them, helping
them air their worries in a way that avoided painful, ineffective
arguments. They argued plenty, but Parsons's authority gave her the
leverage to interrupt the argument, call a break, and provide per-
spective. In cases more problematic than the Buchanans', she could
call in a professional counselor.
  As an insider in the health care establishment, Parsons's authority
gave her the power to arbitrate among her professional colleagues
when conflicts arose. As the primary physician for the family, she
lIB   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


had the power to call them into conferences to clarify and decide
among the options for treatment. Although she did not have the
authority to make all medical decisions for the family, she had the
power to resolve professional differences about diagnosis and treat-
ment. What she would communicate to the patient and family was
a matter largely of her choosing. She might communicate the differ-
ences among the professionals or she might not; in either case, the
health establishment by and large recognized her authority to decide.
   For Ruckelshaus, orchestrating multiparty conflict was central to
the challenge. Indeed, if there had been no competing values and
perspectives at play, including his own perspectives given his personal
biases and professional vantage point, the problem would have been
straightforward: either close or protect the plant depending on what
seemed right to everybody. Deciding what standards to set for the
copper plant became problematic because one faction in the com-
munity primarily wanted to protect the plant's viability, while an-
other faction primarily wanted to protect public health and the
environment. The essence of the problem consisted of orchestrating
these conflicting voices into some sort of harmony.
   The task Ruckelshaus faced is typical of leadership in large social
systems. By its nature, adaptive work does not often fall within the
purview of established organizational and social structures. Pieces of
the puzzle-information about the problem-lie scattered in the
hands of stakeholders across divisions, interest groups, organiza-
tions, and communities. Not only is the information scattered, but
the solution requires adjustments in the attitudes and behaviors of
many people across boundaries. Hence, an authority who excludes
stakeholders from defining and solving the problem risks developing
an incomplete solution or a solution to the wrong problem. At a
minimum, he must keep track of the missing perspectives and stakes
when he leaves people out. Not only can lack of information under-
mine the quality of work, but the distress of exclusion can also cause
people to sabotage the process and attack authority.
   Groups that come together to address an adaptive problem gen-
erally consist of representatives from interested parties that act as
factions. To exercise leadership in such a group, one needs to under-
stand the constituent pressures on each of those representatives and
the relationships among their organizations. A person who leads may
                                              Applying Power    /   119

identify the adaptive challenge, but the members, each representing
a different faction, will define and break down the issues in their
own ways. Each faction has its own grammar for analyzing a situ-
ation-a system of internal logic that defines the terms of problems
and solutions in ways that make sense to its own group members.
Shaped by tradition, power relationships, and interests, this internal
language of problem-solving is used largely unconsciously, but mem-
bers of the faction know intuitively when it is misused. To lead a
group of factions, one has to sense the separate languages. For
example, environmentalists in Tacoma spoke both in spiritual terms
about the sanctity of the earth and in practical terms about public
health. The Asarco workers spoke both about a family and commu-
nity way of life going back one hundred years and about jobs.
Leading these factions required engaging each in the perspective of
the other. The task was to orchestrate the clash of views so that the
factions learned from one another and, at a minimum, achieved a
workable respect.
   Thus, leading across boundaries requires permeating and reform-
ing the boundaries. If one is to organize meetings with repre-
sentatives of disputing groups, one must invade the normal
boundaries and convince each decisionmaker to risk commitments
to his or her "home" interests. In essence, one wishes to form a new
coalition with these people, where the coalition entity has a purpose
that redirects the previous purposes of the parent organizations. If
successful, then the coalition will achieve a self-perceived boundary
of identity and a cohesion of self-interest. That is the beginning.
Then, each representative must lead his or her own faction in its own
process of incorporating what the representatives learned in the
coalition. Clearly, this is an iterative process in which individuals
import and export perspectives across boundaries as their own con-
stituents adjust their views.
   Ruckelshaus worked across boundaries such as these. The first
task was to stir up the conflict by raising the issue publicly and
drawing competing perspectives out into the open. This was the
easier part. He announced that a ruling was imminent and that the
public would bear the weight of deliberating on it. That cast two
coals into the fire at once: the issue itself-a ruling on arsenic emis-
sions, and the process of decision-public participation rather than
120   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

authoritative decisionmaking. Both features of his announcement
aroused attention and engagement.
   The second and more complex task for Ruckelshaus was to or-
chestrate the conflict he had unleashed between factions so that it
would be resolved without getting out of hand, by degenerating into
violence, for example. No one wanted to see a bomb go off at the
Asarco plant by the hand of an enraged parent of a leukemic child.
This second task took up the full-time energies of thirty staff mem-
bers for four months.
   To contain the level of disequilibrium, the staff used a variety of
tools. Structure in the form of workshops went far to contain and
direct the emotionalism of the debate. The workshops themselves
were highly structured, actively facilitated by staff to ensure that no
individual dominated the conversation. Staff recorders noted any
questions remaining on the table and promised that they would be
investigated further. The presence of EPA scientists bolstered the
holding environment by providing an expert orienting perspective.
Lay participants felt privy to discussions among competing indus-
trial, environmental, and governmental experts. Including lay citi-
zens in the decisionmaking both educated the public and diminished
the public's feelings of distress and helplessness. As new workshops
spontaneously emerged in the process, the EPA remained a presence,
monitoring and listening to the debates. People felt that their con-
tinuing deliberations were being heard.
   Nevertheless, the public debate was full of conflict and passionate
argument, which are probably inevitable when a diverse community
is facing a complex adaptive challenge. The workshops ensured that
the various sides would hear one another, but the format did not
attempt to smooth away the conflict. 1s Nor should it have.
   With the formation of new coalitions of people-knitting together
local business, big industry, labor, the United Way, state and local
agencies, and city government-the community developed two new
mechanisms for tackling ongoing problems. The Displaced Workers
Project, created for Asarco, became a model for dealing with plant
closings in the area. And the public involvement method used for
Asarco to resolve industrial pollution issues came to serve, in
modified form, as a means to handle other environmental disputes
in the community. Ten years later, both of these continue to function.
                                                Applying Power    I   121

By permeating old boundaries and creating new relationships across
them, the Asarco experience strengthened the community's adaptive
capacity.

                Choosing the Decisionmaking Process
Authorities commonly have the power to choose the decisionmaking
process. In essence, they must decide on the presence and relevance
of conflict, and whether and how to unleash it. Deciding which
process to use-autocratic, consultative, participative, or consen-
sual-requires judgment based on several factors. 16 We have begun
to introduce three of these factors already: the type of problem, the
resilience of the social system, and the severity of the problem. To
these we should add a fourth: the time frame for taking action. The
first factor is relatively straightforward. In technical situations, where
the authority has the expertise to define and solve the problem,
people generally opt for autocratic or consultative decisionmaking.
Anything else makes little sense, unless one is using a technical
situation for training purposes. Otherwise, let the experts do their
job.
   Adaptive situations, however, tend to demand a more participative
mode of operating to shift responsibility to the primary stakeholders.
Because the problem lies largely in their attitudes, values, habits, or
current relationships, the problem-solving has to take place in their
hearts and minds. One produces progress on adaptive problems by
working the conflicts within and between the parties. Yet when faced
with an adaptive challenge, an authority might still choose a more
autocratic mode as a result of other factors. First, the organization
or community may have too little resilience to bear the stresses of
adaptive work. Giving the work back to people may overwhelm
them and run counter to prevailing norms. Low adaptive capacity
may derive from lack of experience in conflict resolution, absence of
shared orienting values, reluctance to endure short-term pain to
obtain long-term benefit, or feeble bonds of identity and trust among
the parties. There may be no familiarity with shared responsibility
for common problems, no tradition of teamwork. The strategic chal-
lenge would be to use autocratic action to begin developing adaptive
capacity. For example, a head of state might rid a judicial system of
122   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

corruption to begin establishing a norm of trust; a public manager
might order a group of bewildered subordinates to provide him with
a strategic plan for an impending problem; or an executive might
change the performance appraisal system to reward experimentation
and teamwork rather than individual success alone.
   Second, even in a highly resilient system, an authority may opt for
autocratic action when confronted with an adaptive challenge so
severe that it generates stress likely to overwhelm even that society.
A participative process might further intensify friction among com-
peting factions. In that case, authorities will have to bear more of
the weight for defining and solving problems, even if their solutions
will knowingly require a large degree of midcourse correction down
the road. Foremost among priorities, the authority will have to
reduce the level of disequilibrium, often by autocratic behavior, to
bring the distress down into the range in which the factions in the
society can begin working productively on the issues. For example,
Franklin Roosevelt took hurried and autocratic action in 1933, and
did so because calming the nation meant as much to the cause of
economic recovery as any programmatic experiment.
   Third, in a crisis situation, there may not be enough time to engage
in a more participative process. A leader may have to take action
knowing that he is guessing and will need to correct for it later.
Roosevelt illustrates this as well. He immediately declared a bank
holiday upon taking office, closing the nation's banks and stopping
the widespread run that was driving many of them into bankruptcy.
Autocratic action broke the momentum of the run and created time
for a more deliberative process to develop a long-term bank policy.
   These three factors can be distilled into the following rule of
thumb: One becomes more autocratic-exclusive-when the issue is
likely to overwhelm the current resilience of the group or society
given the time available for decision.
   In the case of the Buchanan family, Parsons made technical deci-
sions about medical treatment on her own, seeking occasional con-
sultation from other medical specialists. In mobilizing the family's
adaptive work, Parsons shifted from an autocratic mode of problem-
solving to a participative style over time as the Buchanans adjusted
to the painful possibilities of their situation and developed the ca-
pacity to face them. She needed time. Although she took her cues
                                               Applying Power I     123

from the family in gauging their readiness, she autocratically made
decisions about how to frame and sequence the issues. In her judg-
ment, they did not at first have the resilience to tolerate the distress
of the illness. Their words early on gave her fairly clear indication.
But as both the family and the holding environment grew stronger,
as was evident when the Buchanans began to raise difficult questions
themselves, Parsons gave more of the work back to them.
   For Ruckelshaus, his formal authority gave him the power to
decide how best to regulate the Asarco smelter. Indeed, the Clean Air
Act required him to decide. But, in effect, by choosing the workshop
process, he gave the decision away. When the plant decided on its
own to close down, in June 1984, Ruckelshaus's decision was already
five months overdue. His delay represented a decision to let the
stakeholders do the deciding.
   In light of his task, we can see why he might deliberately have
refused to decide. Ruckelshaus's challenge was to mobilize people
locally to tackle a tough adaptive problem. Given the persistent drop
in copper prices, the need for economic diversification was becoming,
on its own, more obvious and urgent. Not only did the owners of
Asarco know it, but the workers and local beneficiaries of the plant
were discovering it as well. The plant was no longer viable. In fact,
it did not really matter what Ruckelshaus would rule. Yet had he
made the decision when he was supposed to, in February 1984, he
may well have provided a distracting focus of attention. The region
might have attributed the plant closure to Ruckelshaus and his in-
sensitivity to business. Rather than face the real problem, people
likely would have scapegoated the EPA and deferred the adaptive
process. As Ruckelshaus put it, "We had to allow them enough time
to work it through. That work was not completed by February."17
Indecision, in essence, forced the public to continue exploring the
discovered challenge of economic diversification.
   At the outset, however, no one knew that William Ruckelshaus
would put off any decision, and neither did he. In response to The
New York Times "Caesar" editorial, Ruckelshaus wrote, "The peo-
ple of Tacoma are not being asked to make the decision; they are
being asked for their informed opinion. They know that the right to
be heard is not the same thing as the right to be heeded. The final
decision is mine."18 He publicly emphasized his authorization to
124   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


make the decision. When Ernesta Barnes, the EPA's regional admin-
istrator, made her opening announcement on July 12th, she empha-
sized that Ruckelshaus would hold on to his prerogative to make the
final decision. According to her, Ruckelshaus planned to weigh the
public's comments heavily, but there would be no vote.
   This, too, made sense as a tactic. Had he given away the power
to decide, he would have given away a key mechanism to orient
everyone involved in the debate and structure its process. Who
would come to EPA workshops in which the EPA were playing a
nondecisive role? People came because they thought that getting the
EPA to listen would make a difference. But the audience that really
mattered, according to Ruckelshaus, was the public itself. Various
factions may have thought that they were lobbying the EPA, but in
fact they were lobbying (and educating) one another under the EPA's
auspIces.
                                 6
                On a Razors Edge


In spite of the resources that come with it, authority is also a strait
jacket. 1 Constituents confer resources in exchange for services. Power
is received in the promise of fulfilling expectations-people in
authority, we insist, must provide direction, protection, and order.
These expectations often make good sense. In technical situations,
adequate preparations for the current problem have been made al-
ready. Procedures, lines of authority, role placements, and norms of
operation have been established. People have a sufficiently clear idea
about what needs to be done and how to go about doing it. Crea-
tivity and ingenuity may be needed, but only to devise variations on
known themes, not new themes altogether.
   Our expectations of authority figures become counterproductive
when our organizations and communities face an adaptive chal-
lenge-when the application of known methods and procedures will
not suffice. We continue to expect our authorities to restore equilib-
rium with dispatch. If they do not act quickly to reduce our feelings
of urgency, we bring them down. Sometimes, we kill them.
   That we sometimes call these situations "crises in leadership" is
symptomatic of the problem of habitually blaming authority. Sty-
mied by our expectation that authorities should provide in adaptive
situations what they can and do provide routinely, we blame them
for the persistence of frustrating problems that demand our own
adaptive work. And so, predictably, our authorities supply us with
fake remedies and diversions. We ask for it. If they want to maintain
                                 125
126   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

the authorization we give them, they have to deliver, or provide
promises of deliverance. When we discover that our authorities have
failed, too frequently we expiate our failures by scapegoating them
and looking for someone with fresh promises.
   When authorities do provide the quick fixes we repeatedly de-
mand, they may be setting a course for crisis, both for themselves
and their people. Maybe the storm that's brewing will hit on some-
one else's watch, and they will escape unscathed; maybe not. Many
heads of state have fallen as problems fester into crises-recently:
Duvalier in Haiti, Marcos in the Philippines, Ortega in Nicaragua,
Honecker in East Germany, Ceauscescu in Romania, to name a few.
Many heads of American businesses went the same route during the
last decade by failing to mobilize adaptive responses to foreign com-
petition.
   Exercising leadership from a position of authority in adaptive
situations means going against the grain. Rather than fulfilling the
expectation for answers, one provides questions; rather than protect-
ing people from outside threat, one lets people feel the threat in order
to stimulate adaptation; instead of orienting people to their current
roles, one disorients people so that new role relationships develop;
rather than quelling conflict, one generates it; instead of maintaining
norms, one challenges them.
   Of course, real life is fluid. An authority figure, even in adaptive
situations, will have to act differently to fulfill each of these social
functions depending on several factors, as just mentioned: the sever-
ity of the problem, the resilience of the social system, the ripeness of
the issue, and time. For example, in an organization one may have
to act firmly to maintain norms and restore clear role assignments,
while challenging people with questions and raising conflict about
direction. But to make tactical decisions to move between technical
and adaptive modes along each of these five dimensions, one first
needs a clear conception of the differences. Table 2 outlines the shifts
that adaptive situations require of authorities.
   In adaptive situations, fulfilling the social functions of authority
requires walking a razor's edge. Challenge people too fast, and they
will push the authority figure over for failing their expectations for
stability. But challenge people too slowly, and they will throw him
down when they discover that no progress has been made. Ulti-
                                                   On a Rator's Edge      I 127

mately, they will blame him for lack of progress. To stay balanced
on the edge, one needs a strategic understanding of the specific tools
and constraints that come with one's authority.
   Yet in either case, an authority figure cuts his feet. When he is the
focus of hopes and pains that are beyond his magic, or any magic,
some people are bound to attack, at least in words. Even the most
agile cannot dodge these attacks completely, nor shield himself, men-
tally and physically, from an assortment of wounds.
   Leadership is a razor's edge because one has to oversee a sustained
period of social disequilibrium during which people confront the
contradictions in their lives and communities and adjust their values


     Table 2. Leadership with Authority in Adaptive Situations

Social function                              Situational type

                       Technical                        Adaptive


Direction              Authority provides               Authority identifies the
                       problem definition and           adaptive challenge,
                       solution                         provides diagnosis of
                                                        condition, and
                                                        produces questions
                                                        about problem
                                                        definitions and
                                                        solutions

Protection             Authority protects from          Authority discloses
                       external threat                  external threat

Role orientation       Authority orients                Authority disorients
                                                        current roles, or resists
                                                        pressure to orient people
                                                        in new roles too quickly

Controlling conflict   Authority restores               Authority exposes con-
                       order                            flict, or lets it emerge

Norm maintenance       Authority maintains              Authority challenges
                       norms                            norms, or allows them
                                                        to be challenged
128   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

and behavior to accommodate new realities. We have begun to
explore the resources that authority brings to directing this process.
These tools can be organized according to five strategic principles of
leadership:
 1. Identify the adaptive challenge. Diagnose the situation in light
    of the values at stake, and unbundle the issues that come with
    it.
 2. Keep the level of distress within a tolerable range for doing
    adaptive work. To use the pressure cooker analogy, keep the
    heat up without blowing up the vessel.
 3. Focus attention on ripening issues and not on stress-reducing
    distractions. Identify which issues can currently engage atten-
    tion; and while directing attention to them, counteract work
    avoidance mechanisms like denial, scapegoating, externalizing
    the enemy, pretending the problem is technical, or attacking
    individuals rather than issues.
 4. Give the work back to people, but at a rate they can stand.
    Place and develop responsibility by putting the pressure on
    the people with the problem.
 S. Protect voices of leadership without authority. Give cover to
    those who raise hard questions and generate distress-people
    who point to the internal contradictions of the society. These
    individuals often will have latitude to provoke rethinking that
    authorities do not have.
   I have suggested that authority, formal and informal, is a key
component of the holding environment-the containing vessel-for
the stresses of change. In the short run, people in authority must
regulate the stresses directly. They have to work within the vessel's
current carrying capacity. In the medium term, the authority figure
can reinforce his contribution to the holding environment by
strengthening his own authority relationships within the community,
and thus increase the community's resilience during his tenure.
   For the long term, the vessel can be given enduring resilience so
that it can tolerate the higher pressures that tougher issues generate,
somewhat independent of the personal presence and power of the
authority figure. People in authority can spur the development of
civic associations that generate social networks of identiflcation. 2
                                              On a Razor's Edge     /   129

They can increase the trustworthiness of authority structures and
institutions. 3 They can create rituals that embody and strengthen
shared orienting values. They can model norms of collaboration,
responsibility-taking, and effective conflict resolution. They can
authorize broadly.4 And they can promote an ethos of learning and
creativity. Over time, a community can become familiar with adap-
tive work, its pain and its profit.
   The primary focus of this book is on the short-run task of making
progress on an adaptive challenge. The long-term task of leader-
ship-developing adaptive capacity-is largely beyond our current
scope, although to some extent the long term is served by accumu-
lating progress and capturing lessons from individual successes. In
focusing on immediate problems, a person intent on leading must
ask four practical and related questions: How can he identify an
adaptive challenge, keep attention focused on the ripening issue,
regulate stress to keep it within a productive range, and take action
to promote social learning so that a new equilibrium is reached? The
efforts in 1965 to secure voting rights for black Americans provides
a testing ground for these questions; in this chapter, we focus on
President Lyndon johnson's strategy of leading from a position of
authority.5


                 Prelude: The Ripening of the Issue
When Johnson assumed the presidency, he moved immediately to
repair the containing vessel that had been weakened by Kennedy's
assassination. He acted to reduce the public's disorientation and fear
of being aboard a rudderless ship. In his first address to the nation,
the new President sounded a clear and direct call to Congress for
action. He introduced few, if any, of his personal ideas; instead he
promised to carryon the work of his predecessor. By so doing, he
reduced the distress of transition and established trust.

  And now the ideas and the ideals which [Kennedy] so nobly repre-
  sented must and will be translated into effective action ... In this
  critical moment, it is our duty, yours and mine, to do away with
  uncertainty and delay and doubt and to show that we are capable of
  decisive action; that from the brutal loss of our leader we will derive
130   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

  not weakness but strength, that we can and will act and act now . . .
  John Kennedy's death commands what his life conveyed-that Amer-
  ica must move forward.

   Presidents usually bring their own people into their administra-
tions. Yet in 1963, with only eleven months to prove himself before
the next presidential election, Johnson relied on Kennedy's Cabinet
and White House. Through continuity in personnel, Johnson again
buttressed the holding environment at the same time that he avoided
drawing attention to himself. With major initiatives ahead, he could
not afford to isolate himself on the point and increase his vulnerabil-
ity to attack. "I constantly had before me the picture that Kennedy
had selected me as executor of his will, it was my duty to carryon
and this meant his people as well as his programs. They were part
of his legacy. I simply couldn't let the country think that I was all
alone. "6
   Even after he was elected President in his own right, Johnson kept
Kennedy men around him. Not only did he value their talent, but he
needed the ongoing support of their constituencies: media, Eastern-
ers, and intellectuals. 7 Thus, he continued to borrow Kennedy's
authority, shield his program with Kennedy's name, and deflect pub-
lic attention from his own person. He had to strengthen the holding
environment to contain the pressures he planned to generate with
his policies.
   Of his many initiatives, perhaps Johnson's most successful were in
civil rights. 8 At his best, Lyndon Johnson built for himself the op-
portunity for leadership by listening intently to the nation, identify-
ing its internal contradictions, and transforming the dialogue of
competing interests into legislation and programs. He encouraged
Martin Luther King Jr.'s civil rights vision, and he encouraged what
he viewed as George Wallace's populist vision of economic justice. 9
Progress would be made by pushing people to engage with one
another to adjust their views or reach compromises. The parties
would be made to do the work.
   Indeed, in his legislative program Johnson routinely put the pres-
sure on the people who asked him for help. Thus, Johnson put the
pressure on black leaders to persuade reluctant conservatives. The
key to success on civil rights, in Johnson's opinion, lay in the hands
                                               Oil a Rator's Edge I 131

of the minority party, the Republicans headed by Senator Everett
Dirksen. Without their support, no new legislation could get past
Senator Richard Russell and the block of Southern Democratic sena-
tors committed to its defeat. They would filibuster it to death, as
they had done with nearly every civil rights bill for nearly a century.10
Yet Johnson was not going to do the lobbying work alone. To win
the Republicans over, Johnson called on Roy Wilkins, head of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), as prelude to introducing the Civil Rights Act of that year.
He placed the calion January 6, 1964, six weeks after assuming the
presidency.
  Johnson:- "When are you going to get down here and start civil
  righting?"
  Wilkins: "As soon as I get rid of my board of directors annual
  meeting."
  Johnson: "Well you tell them that I think they've got a mighty good
  man. I don't know of a better, fairer, or abler man in the United States.
  What I want you to do though is to get on this bill now. Because
  unless you get twenty-five Republicans you're not going to get cloture
  [to stop a filibuster]. Now you can't quote me on this, but Russell
  says he's already got enough commitments to prevent cloture. I think
  you are going to have to sit down with Dirksen and persuade him
  this is in the interest of the Republican party, and you think that if
  the Republicans go along with you on cloture, why you'll go along
  with them at elections. And let them know that you're going with the
  presidential candidate that offers you the best hope and the best
  chance of dignity and decency in this country, and you're going with
  a senatorial man who does the same thing. I'm no magician. Now I
  want to be with you, and I'm going to help you any way I can. But
  you're going to have to get these folks in here, and the quicker you
  get them the better. If we lose this fight we're going back ten years."
   Indeed, the Senate went through seventy-five days of filibuster over
the Civil Rights bill-the longest in its history. But on June 10, 1964,
it was ready to vote on cloture. The key, as Johnson had said, was
Dirksen. In response to Russell's protest that "the bill simply involves
a political question and not a moral issue," Dirksen finally took his
stand. Declaring "civil rights is an idea whose time has come ... we
132   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

are confronted with a moral issue," he had turned around. 11 Dirk-
sen's priorities had shifted in the course of his conversations with
Wilkins and others. The issue had been made to ripen. As Johnson
later described the problem to his biographer Doris Kearns: "The
challenge was to learn what it was that mattered to each of these
men, understand which issues were critical to whom and why. With-
out that understanding nothing is possible. Knowing the leaders and
understanding their organizational needs let me shape my legislative
program to fit both their needs and mine." In pursuing domestic
policies in general, Johnson sought to induce the relevant parties-
business leaders, educators, labor, the media-to get involved with
one another. Some authorities might concentrate on getting people
to acquiesce to their commands. Johnson sought to educate people
to cooperate with one another, respecting one another's goals. He
corraled people into collaborative work. As he described it, "I
wanted each of these men to participate in my administration in a
dozen different ways. The key was to get men from different groups
so involved with each other on so many committees and delegations
covering so many issues that no one could afford to be uncompro-
mising on anyone issue alone." 12
   Johnson intended to mobilize the nation as a whole to work on
issues that had been avoided for nearly two hundred years. Yet
mobilizing the society to tackle hard problems and learn new ways
required far more than fashioning deals in the legislature; it required
public leadership. Johnson had to identify the adaptive challenges
facing the nation, regulate the level of distress, counteract work-
avoiding distractions, place responsibility where it belonged, and
protect voices of leadership in the community. Nowhere did he
illustrate this strategy of leadership better than during events in
Selma, Alabama.

                    Selma-Eight Days in 1965
On Sunday, March 7, 1965, black Americans set out to march from
Selma to the state capital at Montgomery in an all-out drive for
voting rights. Selma, a city of about 29,000, had slightly more black
people than white, but only 3 percent of the people on its voting
rolls were black. Out of 15,000 black citizens, 325 were registered
                                          On a Razor's Edge   / 133

to vote. 13 The county had used time-worn methods to prevent black
citizens from registering to vote, including lengthy written examina-
tions and tricky oral questions like: Recite the Thirteenth Amend-
ment to the Constitution, and what two rights does a citizen have
after indictment by a grand jury? Governor Wallace of Alabama had
declared during his campaign in 1962: "From this cradle of the
Confederacy, this very heart of the great Anglo-Saxon South-
land ... , segregation now! Segregation tomorrow! Segregation for-
ever! "14
   In response to the voting rights march, Governor Wallace sent the
state police against the 600 unarmed black people as they reached
the city limits. 1s Americans throughout the country witnessed with
shock and fury the televised scenes of black men, women, and chil-
dren being beaten with billy clubs, stricken with tear gas, and bull-
whipped by troopers on horseback. As loud as the screaming was
the yelling of white onlookers, "Git 'em! Git 'em! "16 In reaction,
spontaneous demonstrations sprang up across the land as massive
pressure focused on President Johnson to mobilize the national
guard. 1?
   Johnson, however, refused to move. In fact, he faced contrary
pressures from Sunday's bloodshed, each with its own long history.
On one hand, the outraged public called on the President to act
forcefully at once to protect the marchers in Selma. People marched
and sat-in at the White House; they marched and sat-in at the Justice
Department; they berated him in the press nationwide. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr., "dismayed and discouraged," accused the federal
government of "timidity."18 On the other hand, many others wanted
Johnson to keep out of the matter. They expressed great fear of
federal interference in their own state affairs. White Southerners,
among others in the nation, were tired of federal government inter-
vention into their way of life and wanted to maintain local norms
and control. Johnson was faced with a conflict between two different
constituencies with two opposing values: states' rights, which repre-
sented white supremacy, and voting rights.
   This conflict was nothing new. It dated back to the Civil War era.
What should be the balance of power between local and central
government in determining civil rights? No one knew better than
Johnson, a long-time Texas politician, how sensitive this question
134   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

remained in the South. And no one knew better than Johnson, as
former Senate Majority Leader and Vice-President, that the balance
of power between local and central governments had been shifting
on the rights issue. The Supreme Court ruled in 1954 that segregated
schools were illegal. 19 President Eisenhower felt obliged to back up
that ruling in 1957 when he sent federal troops to Little Rock,
Arkansas, to integrate Central High School. Five years later, in 1962,
John F. Kennedy sent federal troops to protect James Meredith as he
enrolled at the University of Mississippi. Just months before the
march in Selma, Johnson and Congress had passed the historic Civil
Rights Act of 1964, which further strengthened the power of the
central government over local affairs. Black people could no longer
be discriminated against in most places of public accommodation,
like hotels, restaurants, and bathrooms. Employers and unions had
to provide equal employment opportunities for minorities. Schools
were given financial and technical assistance to speed desegregation.
   The country had spent years deliberating and testing the issue and,
by and large, had come down on the side of protecting civil rights
against local transgression. But not fully. The previous year, Congress
had been unable to agree on a voting rights provision for the 1964
Civil Rights Act. Johnson had floated the idea, but Congress rejected
it. Too many white people found it hard enough to integrate restau-
rants and schools. They refused to give blacks political power. The
Congressional stalemate on voting rights indicated that the country
as a whole was not yet ready to enfranchise minorities. Urgency over
the issue was far from widespread; voting rights had not yet fastened
in people's minds. The steps taken in 1964 toward guaranteeing civil
rights were as large as the public seemed able to take at that moment.
   Legislators were not about to take pains unless constituents de-
manded it. Taking pains for a legislator meant making costly bar-
gains with other legislators, giving in on one issue in exchange for
support on another, and paying the price back home. These bargains
were least painful and risky if the legislator had multiple goals with
varying importance to his or her district. A minor goal could be
traded away for an urgent one, particularly if other legislators had
complementary priorities, without much cost. Such was the case with
civil rights legislation. Until Selma, white citizens across the nation
generally gave voting rights low priority. For instance, during the
                                                 On a Razor's Edge      /   135

Senate debate over the Civil Rights Bill of 1957, four liberal Western
senators-Wayne Morse, Warren Magnuson, Mike Mansfield, and
Jim Murray-agreed to support a greatly weakened bill in exchange
for Southern support to finance the construction of the Hells Canyon
Dam in Idaho. The dam would generate electrical power for the
region. Although these Western senators would normally back civil
rights, they were compelled to make trades because their districts
cared more about the dam. 20
   In private meetings in early 1965, Johnson, knowing the con-
straints of his role, encouraged King in his plans to ripen the voting
rights issue. Although he hoped there would be no violence, he
thought public pressure might set the stage for legislative action. 21
As did King. By generating nationwide urgency, the civil rights move-
ment aimed to change the public's priorities and throw Congress into
motion. King and his strategists had learned through decades of
effort that the federal government would protect the rights of black
Americans when public pressure forced it to. 22 So the civil rights
movement would turn up the heat. Through the carefully scripted
presence of television reporters, the brutality of racism would be
transmitted into living rooms throughout the land. Demonstrations
would force the nation to pay attention. On Sunday, March 7, after
the televised beatings in Selma, Dr. King announced:
  In the vicious maltreatment of defenseless citizens of Selma, where old
  women and young children were gassed and clubbed at random, we
  have witnessed an eruption of the disease of racism which seeks to
  destroy all of America . . . The people of Selma will struggle for the
  soul of the Nation, but it is fitting that all Americans help to bear the
  burden. I call, therefore, on clergy of all faiths, representative of every
  part of the country to join me in Selma for a minister's march on
  Montgomery Tuesday morning. 23

  In anticipation of Tuesday's march, the pressure on Johnson grew
enormously. Marches and demonstrations proliferated across the
country. Busloads and planeloads of priests, ministers, rabbis, nuns,
and lay people descended on Selma. 24 In Washington, D.C., sit-ins at
the Justice Department continued to block Attorney General Katzen-
bach's office. The White House was deluged with telegrams and calls
to take action. A group of demonstrators sat-in during a White
136   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

House tour, yelling angry epithets at whoever passed by. Clearly, the
public did not relish the prospect of more televised beatings, this time
with King and the nation's clergy at the forefront. The public looked
to President Johnson to restore order. As he described it, "Every-
where I looked I was being denounced for my 'unbelievable lack of
action.'" 25
   On Monday afternoon, King's lawyers appealed to the federal
court in Montgomery for an injunction forbidding local and state
authorities from interfering with Tuesday's march. 26 Instead, Judge
Frank Johnson issued a restraining order to delay the march entirely
for a few days until proper safety precautions could be made. In light
of this order, President Johnson felt compelled to step in. He quietly
sent LeRoy Collins from the Justice Department aboard Air Force
One to negotiate a middle path with King that would keep the public
pressure on without going farther than any President could legally
allow. At the very last minute, on Tuesday morning as the march
itself was moving, they made a deal. King avoided clashing with local
and State police, and with the federal court, and turned the march
back after a dramatic moment of prayer at the site of Sunday's
violence. 27 The nation held its breath as it lived through the encoun-
ter on television. And though momentarily relieved, the acute level
of tension remained very high. Dr. King insisted that the full three-
day march to Montgomery still lay ahead.
   Johnson continued to hold steady. He neither quelled nor inflamed
the situation. Rather than take dramatic public action or a clear
stand, Johnson issued a luke-warm statement Tuesday afternoon
deploring the brutality in Selma and urging leaders on all sides to
"approach this tense situation with calmness, reasonableness, and
respect for law and order. "28 He added that he would be sending a
voting rights bill to Congress by the weekend. Privately, however,
after seeing the televised beatings and judging their public impact,
he called in the Justice Department and asked them to draft the
strongest bill that would have any chance of surviving a constitu-
tional challenge. 29
   On Tuesday night, Reverend James J. Reeb, a white Unitarian
minister from Boston, was beaten badly by a group of white people
in Selma; he died two days later. His was the second death. Jimmy
Lee Jackson, a seventeen year-old black man, had been shot by state
                                            On a Razor's Edge   /   137

troopers two weeks before while marching in nearby Marion, Ala-
bama. 3D Reverend Reeb's fatal beating added more fuel to the dem-
onstrations and the urgency. "But," as Kearns described it, "Johnson
refused to be pushed. Pickets surrounded the White House, carrying
placards calculated to shame him into action: 'LBJ, open your eyes,
see the sickness of the South, see the horrors of your homeland.'
Telegrams and letters demanding action streamed into the President's
office."3! Still, Johnson held steady through Tuesday night, Wednes-
day, Thursday, and Friday. At one point, a presidential aide inter-
jected, "We have to do something." Johnson replied, "We will. Keep
the pressure on. Make it clear we're not going to give an inch. Now
that Wallace ... it's his ox that's in the ditch, let's see how he gets
him out."32
   Finally, on Friday, Wallace asked to meet with the President, and
Johnson granted the request at once. As Johnson understood the
situation, Wallace had national aspirations. He had run briefly for
President in 1964. He could ill afford more bloodshed broadcast
nationwide from his state. As much as he hated to give in on civil
rights, Wallace also had to maintain law and order. Thus, Johnson
had something Wallace needed. He could help Wallace back out of
his corner because he, Johnson, had refused to back into one himself.
"On Saturday, in the Oval Office, they discussed the question of
troops. Johnson appealed to the large ambition and the populist
strain that he perceived in Wallace: How could there be any fixed
limits, he ~uggested, to the political career of the first Southern
governor to combine economic and social reform with racial har-
mony? Why not Wallace? "33
   The meeting resulted in an arrangement. Johnson would rescue
Wallace from his obligations to maintain the law and protect inno-
cent black people, for which he would have paid dearly with his own
white constituents, but Wallace would have to ask Johnson publicly
to mobilize the national guard. 34 Following the meeting, Johnson
took Wallace into a prearranged press conference where he made
sure that Wallace was still publicly on the hook, that is, accountable
for protecting all citizens, black and white. Johnson announced: "If
local authorities are unable to function, the federal government will
completely meet its responsibilities." 35
   The next day, Sunday, while 15,000 demonstrators outside the
138   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

White House sang "We shall overcome," and chanted: "LBJ, just
you wait, See what happens in '68," Johnson solicited an invitation
to appear before a joint session of Congress the next evening, Mon-
day, March 15, and he began to prepare for his now historic speech. 36


                       Principles of Leadership
Before reviewing the speech that served as the climax to these events,
we should analyze Johnson's strategy of leadership. As events in
Selma unfolded, Johnson would have had to ask himself several
questions in making his assessment. Of course, one cannot say with
any certainty how Lyndon Johnson thought his way through this
crisis or whether his leadership actions were reflective or instinctive.
Even Johnson himself could not tell us completely because our hu-
man minds work faster than we can recall, and many of our calcu-
lations are made unconsciously. Also, Johnson was very good at
telling history the way he wanted it told. Nevertheless, we can pose
the strategic questions without knowing the extent to which Johnson
may have done so himself. This analysis may not explain Johnson
as much as it illustrates a conception of leadership.

Identifying the Adaptive Challenge. Johnson immediately con-
fronted two questions already familiar to him: (1) What issues were
represented by this conflict-what were people really fighting about?
and (2) Did the issues constitute a technical problem for which an
authoritative response would suffice, or did the situation require
adaptive change? In many situations, the answers to these questions
are not obvious, but in this situation they were readily apparent.
The country had been working on these questions for years. The
issue was a conflict over values: Would the values of freedom and
equality or the values of traditional, local white cultures prevail?
Stated simply, either white people had to make room, or black
people had to accept their place. Johnson could not solve this
dilemma. No authoritative presidential decision would "fix" this
kind of problem. This problem existed in the minds and hearts of
citizens, and only adjustments there would resolve the value conflict.
What the President could do was animate and prod people across
the nation to address the internal contradiction between the values
                                               On a Razor's Edge     I   139

of freedom and equality they espoused and the mode of suppression
they lived or permitted. Although laws, political stands, and pro-
grams could not mandate adaptive change, they could fix attention
on the need for adjustment. They could begin to change institutions
to create new norms and set new limits on behavior. 3? As Johnson
commented after passage the previous year of the Civil Rights Act,
"I understand that a law doesn't change people's feeling. But it's a
beginning. It shows the way."38
   Johnson wanted to know, given the limits and constraints of his
authority, how he could make it possible for people to learn new
attitudes and habits of behavior. How could he change people's
feelings at least sufficiently to generate the political will for legislation
that would then set a new standard and norm for the society? These
questions are the kind that politicians and activists need to keep
asking throughout their careers. Johnson did not have the final
answers. But his responses to Selma illustrate at least four conditions
for stimulating adaptive change after the challenge has been iden-
tified: managed stress, disciplined by attention to the issues, with
pressure on those who need to take responsibility for the changes in
their midst, and protective cover for threatened leadership voices.

Regulating Distress. In the midst of crisis, the first priority is to
evaluate the level of social distress, and, if it is too high, take action
to bring it into a productive range. Confronted by overwhelming
distress, a society and its factions may fall back on extreme measures
to restore direction, protection, and order: authoritarian rule, sup-
pression of dissent, fragmentation into smaller identity groups (eth-
nic, religious, regional), and war (civil and otherwise). Thus,
Johnson had to assess the level of disequilibrium in the society in
order to determine whether or not emergency actions were called
for, like sending in the National Guard. Could the nation sustain
the storm without breaking apart? Were the bonds that held people
together (political and civic institutions, economic interdependen-
cies, cultural norms, shared values, patriotic identifications)
sufficiently resilient to withstand the stresses?39 Was the nation over-
whelmed for other reasons (a depressed economy or war)?
   These questions defined the upper limits of tolerance, and
Johnson's answers were clear: The nation as a whole could take it.
140   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

Americans had withstood much more. The bonds holding the nation
together were not breaking. Political institutions were operating.
Particular cultural and political norms were being challenged, as
were critical values, but many of society's other norms and values
were functioning as before to provide meaning, orientation, and
structure to people's lives. People were still going about their busi-
ness. The Vietnam build-up was not capturing very much attention.
The economy was functioning smoothly. Many people questioned
deeply the contradictions within the nation, but relatively few
seemed to give up their patriotism. To be sure, civil rights activists
were being brutally injured and killed, and that might itself be cause
for immediate action, but the nation itself was not apparently at
risk-as it had been one hundred years before. Johnson could afford
to hold steady for a time.
   Crises provide authority figures with more power because people
look to them to provide resolution. Distress enhances their visibility
and impact. Thus, in times of distress, people around the country
scrutinize a President's every response-precisely because he is the
nation's central figure of authority. They search for indications of
how worried they should be about the situation. If he appears
alarmed, then their fears will rise.
   Hence, a President's immediate mechanism to contain distress
during a crisis is to contain himself. If he indicates through his calm
demeanor that the situation, serious as it is, is no cause for panic,
he reduces the possibility of one. He can regulate the level of dise-
quilibrium in the society by the cues he gives, even by the pitch and
tone of his voice. Of course, he can go too far; when he denies for
too long the difficulty people experience, they will get angry.
   However, people look to authority not only for cues but also for
action. Action itself can reduce the experience of disequilibrium
because it shifts the appearance of responsibility for the problem
onto the shoulders of the one taking action. Action suggests that" He
will show us the way." People can relax their attention because
someone in authority is paying attention. Thus, authoritative action
will tend to reduce stress, while inaction will increase it. This may
be true regardless of the content of the action. Action itself commu-
nicates. For example, it is quite conceivable that what mattered most
in reducing the sense of crisis during Franklin Roosevelt's first one
hundred days was not his specific actions but his activism. 40
                                               On a Razor's Edge     I 141

   How did Johnson regulate the level of distress? In this case, events
beyond his own immediate doing had provoked the distress. South-
ern blacks and Southern whites had caused it, albeit with Johnson's
tacit encouragement. As the central authority figure for the nation,
Johnson had the presence of mind, or the instincts, to use it as
opportunity. King and his organizers turned up the heat, but Johnson
let the stew simmer. By his calm demeanor and lukewarm statements,
Johnson communicated that the crisis was no emergency. But by
inaction, Johnson raised the level of tension so that people could no
longer ignore their own responsibility for the harsh reality of black
people being beaten for requesting an equal right to vote.

Directing Disciplined Attention to the Issues. By having waited over
a week to make a move, Johnson allowed television images of racial
brutality to settle into the public consciousness. He prevented pre-
mature closure. When he finally announced during his press confer-
ence with Wallace that, if necessary, he would take decisive action,
he merely relieved the immediate source of distress. The underlying
issue had now fastened in people's minds, where it would continue
to generate dissonance. Dissonance would call for more action. The
issue would ripen: people would come to see the issue as a public
priority. And therein lay the opportunity. Johnson waited to seize
that moment when he could address the issue of racial justice rather
than merely diffuse the dissonance. He took the event and gave it
meaning that would have been lost before.
   Had Johnson intervened as the nation demanded, by mobilizing
the National Guard, he would surely have reduced the public's dis-
tress over police brutality against black Americans. Johnson's action
would have directed the nation's attention to a side issue: protecting
the marchers' right to express their demands. Yet as Johnson unbun-
dled the issues, the point was not the right to march; the point was
the right to vote. Had Johnson intervened immediately, the issue
might have been understood the wrong way-the easy way.
   Worse, his intervention would also have diverted the nation's at-
tention from the issue of racism to the issue of state's rights. Johnson,
the Southern politician, knew better than to let that happen.

  If I just send in federal troops with their big black boots and rifles,
  it'll look like Reconstruction all over again. I'll lose every moderate,
142   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


  and not just in Alabama but all over the South. Most southern people
  don't like this violence; they know, deep in their hearts, that things
  are going to change. And they'll accommodate. They may not like it,
  but they'll accommodate. But not if it looks like the Civil War all over
  again. That'll force them right into the arms of extremists, and make
  a martyr out of Wallace. And that's not going to help the Negroes
  ... I may have to send in troops. But not until I have to, not until
  everyone can see I had no other choice. 41

   Had he intervened immediately, Johnson would probably have
survived quite well, personally. As a Southerner intervening with
federal troops to protect innocent black people, he would likely have
gained considerable popularity throughout much of the nation.
There were good precedents for federal interference into racial dis-
turbances: Kennedy in Mississippi, Eisenhower in Arkansas. And
they were Northerners.
   Stepping in decisively to resolve the crisis, however, would have
interrupted the work being done in the polity. By letting the distress
persist for over a week, Johnson provided the nation with no choice
but to face the issue of racism itself. The appalled public would not
permit Southern whites to frame the issue as states' rights. Further-
more, voters throughout the nation had witnessed from their own
living rooms that the marchers longed for the right to vote, not the
right to march. The issue would not be mistaken as states' rights or
the right of black people to march. By refusing to be pushed by the
public, Johnson pushed people to face the internal contradictions of
their society, embodied in the sights they could not avoid watching
on television.


Giving the Work Back to People. johnson's long experience taught
him to be wary of the trap that Wallace had set-shifting all respon-
sibility to the highest authority. By stepping in with troops, Johnson
would have presented himself and his office as a receptacle for blame
or credit. Either would be a diversion from working on the problem
of equality. The solution to the crisis would have become "johnson's
solution," framed as federal interference in states' affairs, or federal
protection of the right to march. Instead, Johnson did nothing to
divert responsibility until the public's will had crystallized. 42 He let
the people with the problem bear weight. He let blacks carry the
                                            On a Razor's Edge    I 143

major responsibility for provoking change. He waited for Wallace
to request federal troops. And he waited until voters across the
nation had done enough work to reveal to themselves, and to him,
the outlines of a solution-their solution. As Kearns described it,
 "When Johnson finally sent troops to Alabama [two weeks after the
crisis began], the act was generally regarded, not as an imperious
imposition of federal power, but as a necessary measure to prevent
further violence. By waiting out his critics and letting the TV clips
make their own impression on the country, he had succeeded in
persuading most of the country that he had acted reluctantly and
out of necessity, not because he was anxious to use federal power
against a guilty South. "43
   The civil rights movement had focused attention and ripened the
issue. johnson's task was to restrain himself from absorbing the
attention and responsibility. The tactic of holding steady shifted the
feeling of necessity to the public so that it would face the issue with
its costs and its gains. The public and its representatives were made
to do the work of changing their attitudes and priorities about
justice.
   Thus, by keeping the spotlight on the persons embodying the
issues, Johnson gave the work of adjustment back to the people with
the problem: the civil rights activists, George Wallace, Congress, and
the general public. For example, he encouraged King in private
meetings to arouse public attention. Animated constituents would
generate the political will and leeway for legislative action. More-
over, he let Wallace stew for awhile, appealing to him at the White
House in his moment of distress to adjust his own view of himself.
To paraphrase Johnson: "Wallace could be a statesman, not just for
Alabama, but for the nation. He could help his people adjust to the
demands for economic and social reform. Social justice might make
sense to a populist like Wallace in the context of economic justice. "44
johnson's authority as President gave him a grip on Wallace, but only
because he had refrained from stealing the limelight and shifting the
responsibility for law and order away from the governor. When
Wallace finally asked for federal assistance (on the grounds that
Alabama could not afford the cost of protecting the marchers),
Johnson let everyone know that he was acting on Wallace's initia-
tive. 45 He made sure that the debate remained focused on civil rights
and not on states' rights, and that Wallace had borne the burden. As
144   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


Johnson put it publicly, "It is not a welcome duty for the federal
government to ever assume a state government's own responsibility
for assuring the protection of citizens in the exercise of their consti-
tutional rights. "46

Protecting Voices of Leadership in the Community. Johnson pro-
vided protection to King and his colleagues in the form of encour-
agement, guidance, and warning. But this was not without its risks.
For example, a police attack on Dr. King and his national entourage
of clergy during Tuesday's march would have been a very big blow
to his presidency. As a Southerner, how could he have recaptured
the high ground? Who would believe that his was just a tactical
error? When a federal court issued a restraining order to delay the
march for a few days, Johnson knew that a limit had been reached.
Although King had tactically violated local and state law previously
to make his point, he relied on national values, politics, and opinion
to hold the states and cities in a process of change. Breaching a
federal court order would have violated the national structure of
authority-the final containing vessel. And Johnson sat atop that
structure. Neither Johnson nor King, nor the civil rights cause itself,
could afford damaging a fundamental trust for legal process. To
avoid a confrontation between King and the federal government,
Johnson tried to dissuade King from marching that day; King in-
sisted, however, and they reached a compromise. In essence,
Johnson made clear to King the limits of the cover he could provide.
The march went on in truncated form, and Johnson held steady
through it. 47
   The pressure on Johnson to "take control of the situation" was
enormous. Presidents are expected to control internal conflict, which
often means supressing dissonant voices. But by and large, Johnson
stayed out of King's way and let the tension grow. By so doing, he
risked losing trust, and thus the basis of his authority. Yet by pro-
tecting King, Wilkins, and others, Johnson let the issues surface and
ripen, and kept his hands free to orchestrate the ensuing debate.

                             The Speech
By waiting, Johnson raised the stakes, not only for the nation but
for himself. If, as President, he failed to act decisively after what
                                               On a Razor's Edge      /   145

seemed so prolonged a time of crisis, the public would hold him
accountable. Public expectations constrained him. As with any per-
son in a position of senior authority, a President eventually has to
provide a clear focal point to restore a sense of direction and order.
Johnson did that eight days after the crisis in Selma had begun. By
that time, the nation looked to Johnson with ever heightened antici-
pation. But by that time, the nation was ready to hear what it needed
to hear, and not just what it wanted to hear. Johnson spoke before
a joint session of Congress during prime evening television. The
speech, excerpted at length, captures Johnson's strategy.

  I speak tonight for the dignity of man and the destiny of democracy
  ... At times history and fate meet at a single time in a single place
  to shape a turning point in man's unending search for freedom. So it
  was at Lexington and Concord. So it was at Appomattox. So it was
  last week in Selma, Alabama ... There is no cause for pride in what
  has happened in Selma. There is no cause for self-satisfaction in the
  long denial of equal rights of millions of Americans. But there is cause
  for hope and for faith in our democracy in what is happening here
  tonight.
    For the cries of pain, the hymns and protest of oppressed people,
  have summoned into convocation all the majesty of this great govern-
  ment . . . In our time we have come to live with moments of great
  crisis ... But rarely in any time does an issue lay bare the secret heart
  of America itself . . . a challenge, not to our growth or abundance,
  our welfare or our security, but to the values and the purposes and
  the meaning of our nation.
    The issue of equal rights for American Negroes is such an issue, and
  should we defeat every enemy, double our wealth, conquer the stars,
  and still be unequal to this issue, then we will have failed as a people
  and a nation. For with a country as with a person, "What shall it
  profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?"
  ... There is no issue of states' rights or national rights. There is only
  the struggle for human rights ...
    Last time a President sent a civil rights bill to Congress it contained
  a provision to protect voting rights. That bill was passed after eight
  long months of debate. And when that bill came to my desk for
  signature, the heart of the voting provision had been eliminated. This
  time, on this issue, there must be no delay, no hesitation, no compro-
146   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

  mise with our purpose . . . And we ought not, and we cannot, and
  we must not wait another eight months before we get a bill. We have
  already waited 100 years and more. And the time for waiting is gone.
     So I ask you to join me in working long hours, nights and weekends
  if necessary to pass this bill. And I don't make the request lightly. For
  from the window where I sit with the problems of our country, I
  recognize that outside this chamber is the outraged conscience of the
  Nation, the grave concern of many nations-and the harsh judgment
  of history on our acts.
     But even if we pass this bill, the battle will not be over. What
  happened in Selma is part of a far larger movement which reaches
  into every section and state of America. It is the effort of American
  Negroes to secure for themselves the full blessings of American life.
  Their cause must be our cause too. It is not just Negroes, but all of
  us, who must overcome the crippling legacy of bigotry and injustice.
  And we shall overcome. As a man whose roots go into Southern soil
  I know how agonizing racial feelings are. I know how difficult it is
  to reshape attitudes and the structure of society ... I say to all of
  you here and to all in the Nation tonight, that those who ask you to
  hold on to the past do so at the cost of denying you your future.
    This great, rich, restless country can offer opportunity and educa-
  tion to all-black and white, North and South, sharecropper and city
  dweller. These are the enemies-poverty and ignorance-and not our
  fellow man. And these too shall be overcome. Let no one, in any
  section, look with prideful righteousness on the troubles of his neigh-
  bors. There is no part of America where the promise of equality has
  been fully kept. In Buffalo as well as Birmingham, in Philadelphia as
  well as Selma, Americans are struggling for the fruits of freedom. This
  is one nation. What happens in Selma or in Cincinnati is a matter
  of legitimate concern to every citizen. But let each of us look within
  our own communities and our own hearts, and root out injustice
  there ...
     The real hero of this struggle is the American Negro. His actions
  and protests-his courage to risk safety and even life-have awakened
  the conscience of the Nation. His demonstrations have been designed
  to call attention to injustice, to provoke change and stir reform. He
  has called upon us to make good the promise of America. And who
  among us can say we would have made the same progress were it not
                                                  On a Razor's Edge       I   147

  for his persistent bravery, and his faith in American democracy. For
  at the heart of battle for equality is a belief in the democratic process. 48

   Historic in its sweep and claim, this speech inspired much of the
country. It also demonstrates and helps summarize our principles of
leadership. First, Johnson spoke clearly to the orienting values of the
nation, the values that had made it one nation: freedom, equality,
and democracy. The issue of civil rights was to be seen in that
context. He identified the adaptive challenge by identifying the dis-
crepancy between our values and behavior. Indeed, he identified the
next adaptive challenge as well: poverty.
   Second, by speaking in so dramatic a fashion-before a joint
session of Congress-Johnson tried to maintain the level of urgency
at the same time that he addressed its causes. Taking charge might
have reduced the pressure had Johnson not demanded immediate
Congressional action. Moreover, Johnson pointed out that Congress
had failed to complete its work on voting rights in the earlier civil
rights legislation. These acts kept the pressure on.
   Third, Johnson kept attention focused on the issue by cautioning
the public to stay clear of the likely work avoidance mechanisms that
might arise: (1) viewing the events in Selma as an issue of states'
rights rather than national values, (2) viewing voting rights legisla-
tion as a technical fix after which people could relax their attention,
(3) holding onto the past, and (4) scapegoating the white people of
Selma by a "prideful righteousness" that would deny the presence
of racism throughout the land.
   Fourth, Johnson told people that the challenge of civil rights would
require adaptive and ongoing work: the attitudes and the structure
of society would have to change. He acknowledged how difficult that
would be. In large part, the work belonged to the general public.
Voting rights legislation was no final remedy; it was simply a catalytic
step. Yet Congress would not be off the hook either. By challenging
its members so publicly to spend sleepless nights, he made them bear
the weight as well. He put all of their names on the line (including
his own) by expecting rapid passage of the bill he would submit in
two days.49
   Finally, Johnson exercised leadership in one of the few ways that
authority figures can-by protecting the voices of those who lead
148   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

with little authority, even though such voices often will be both
deviant and annoying. He credited the civil rights movement for
provoking the nation to face the large gap between what we stood
for and the way we lived.
   In exercising leadership on civil rights, was Johnson advancing his
own vision for the country? Not really. As a Southern congressman
since 1937 and senator since 1949, Johnson came out in favor of
civil rights only in 1956 when he saw the issue ripening and saw
himself as a national contender. 50 For nearly twenty years he had
voted against every civil rights bill before Congress-laws to end the
poll tax, segregation in the armed services, and lynching. 51 In 1960
he opposed liberal proposals for federal voting registrars in favor of
the middle-of-the-road proposal for voting referees, which had not
worked. As Vice-President, he had decided against liberalizing Senate
rules, which distressed civil rights advocates. 52 During the debate
over the Civil Rights Act of 1964, he backed a moderate conception
for a voting rights clause. When Congress seemed unready even for
that, he did not push it.
   It seems then that the civil rights movement and the events in
Selma had their impact on Johnson's conscience, as well as that of
the nation. As he described in his memoirs, "Nothing makes a man
come to grips more directly with his conscience than the Presidency.
Sitting in that chair involves making decisions that draw out a man's
fundamental commitments. The burden of his responsibility literally
opens up his soul. No longer can he accept matters as given: no
longer can he write off hopes and needs as impossible. In that house
of decision, the White House, a man becomes his commitments. He
understands who he really is. He learns what he genuinely wants to
be. "53
   We often think that leadership means having a clear vision and
the capacity to persuade people to make it real. In this case, Johnson
had authored no vision. Events acted on him to shape the vision to
which he then gave powerful articulation. He identified the nation~s
vision and put it into words. As the nation clarified its values, so did
he. johnson's leadership lay in his wherewithal to give meaning to
the crisis and avoid the common pitfall of restoring order prema-
turely. He let the heat remain high. He kept people's attention on the
issues generating the heat. He shifted responsibility to those with the
                                            On a Razor's Edge   I   149

problem. He let the dissident voices be heard. Along with the nation,
he wrestled with its fundamental orienting values. He gave those
values the power of his voice and his presence. 54 And he seized the
moment to turn the nation's emerging values into potent legislation. 55
  Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act into law on August 6, 1965.
Within one week, federal registrars set up shop; six months later,
9,000 black people were registered to vote in Selma. 56
                                    7
               Falling Off the Edge

Lyndon Johnson's successes on domestic issues contrast sharply with
his failure on Vietnam. In foreign affairs, Johnson took the stance
that leaders lead and followers follow. This provided the wrong
footing for leading the key stakeholders in developing policy and for
calculating the political consequences of his decisions. Autocratic
decisionmaking assumes that authorities have little to learn, and in
johnson's case, it limited his ability to test basic substantive, political,
and moral assumptions.
   Substantive flaws in policy reasoning were manifold. In setting
Vietnam policy, Johnson and his advisers drew inapt historical analo-
gies with Munich 1938, the British suppression of the Burmese
insurgency after World War II, the Korean War, and the French
Indochina War.! In addition, they accepted as truth the domino
theory-if one country falls to communism, others will fall like
dominoes-rather than considering it a hypothesis requiring scru-
tiny.2 Furthermore, they made poor and untested assumptions about
the history and psychology of the Vietnamese, both North and
South, their wars and authorities, and the resilience of indigenous
guerilla warfare. 3
   Deficiencies in the process of policy development arose from fail-
ing systematically to answer critical policy questions that were being
raised by individual advisers and the President. Many of these ques-
tions were either left in the air or answered impressionistically. For
example, would the North Vietnamese be inclined to bargain?4 Did
                                    150
                                           Falling Off the Edge   I 151

the American people have the will to prosecute a long war in Asia?
Would the Viet Cong fight the kind of conventional war Americans
knew how to fight, or would they rely on guerilla tactics? Was it
ethical to fight this war? The key questions were asked, yet no
structured process provided a means fully to investigate and analyze
the answers. 5
   Finally, Johnson miscalculated the political risks of going to war.
Fearing the loss of ground on his domestic agenda, the Great Society,
he made highly optimistic estimates of how easily he could bring Ho
Chi Minh to the bargaining table. He succeeded in the short term in
rallying Congress and public opinion, but failed to gauge the likely
effects of prolonged military involvement on both his career and
domestic agenda. 6
   In formulating foreign policy, Johnson seems to have ignored the
lessons of his domestic policy successes. What he seemed to know in
his bones about domestic affairs he seemed to forget in the arena of
foreign policy. In setting and implementing Vietnam policy, Johnson
made fatal mistakes by acting the part of the lone warrior and by
creeping up in stealth not only on his enemy but also on his own
constituents. In terms of the principles illustrated by Johnson's civil
rights leadership, he failed to face the nation with the adaptive
challenge of Vietnam, to keep the level of distress within a productive
range, to discipline attention, to distribute responsibility, and to use
dissent as a source of insight and options. What might have seemed
in his mind an effort to pace the work became instead an act of
misleading the nation.

                           ''johnson's War"
After Kennedy's death, Johnson pledged, "Let us continue." Yet in
addition to inheriting civil rights legislation, antipoverty initiatives,
and other domestic policies that he understood and believed in, he
inherited a crisis in Vietnam that had reached the boiling point in
the aftermath of the U.S.-backed overthrow of Ngo Dinh Diem,
South Vietnam's President, in early November 1963. According to
his advisers, South Vietnam would fall to the Communists unless
bolstered by a quantum leap in American military involvement.
  With his eye on the Great Society and his own election the follow-
152   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

ing November, Johnson hedged and delayed, trying to avoid a deci-
sive commitment. Instead, he found small ways to bolster the South
Vietnamese government. He reaffirmed America's commitment to the
new and shaky regime by increasing the number of "advisers" from
16,300 to 23,300 and expanding economic aid by 50 million dollars.
He also approved a new program of covert operations against the
North Vietnamese. 7 At the same time, Johnson's policy advisers
prepared plans radically changing the nature of u.s. involvement by
bombing the North and sending large numbers of American ground
troops into the South. These included secret drafts of legislation
authorizing war. 8
   Although johnson's advisers planned to escalate the war sometime
after the election, Johnson himself denied any plan to move to a
larger war, both to voters during the election campaign and in
private discussions with members of Congress. Johnson depicted
Barry Goldwater, his Republican opponent, as a "hawk" on Vietnam
and a reckless warmaker. Johnson told Americans that u.S. involve-
ment would be limited to training and logistical support. He repeated
that promise in campaign speeches: "There are those that say you
ought to go north and drop bombs, to try to wipe out the supply
lines, and they think that would escalate the war. We don't want our
American boys to do the fighting for Asian boys. We don't want to
get ... tied down in a land war in Asia."9
   On August 4th, during the campaign, the North Vietnamese alleg-
edly executed a "wholly unprovoked" attack on two u.S. destroyers
in the Gulf of Tonkin. 10 Two days later, Johnson sent the already
prepared legislation to Congress, asking it urgently "to approve and
support the determination of the President as Commander-in-Chief
to take all the necessary measures to repel any armed attack against
the forces of the United States to prevent further aggression ... [and]
to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist
any member or protocol state of the Southeast Asia Collective De-
fense Treaty [SEATO] requesting assistance in defense of its free-
dom."ll Only two senators dissented. In the House, the vote was
unanimous, 416 to O. In the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, Congress
gave Johnson all the authorization he would need to go to war. 12
   Had the United States really been attacked in the Gulf of Tonkin?
Was our bombing of North Vietnam in retaliation based solely upon
                                          Falling Off the Edge   /   153

a radar finding? No enemy ship had been seen, and no wreckage had
been found. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and others
knew of the lack of evidence for the attack, but neither he nor the
President were about to cast doubts before Congress or the nation.
With the memories of Pearl Harbor still fresh, an unprovoked attack
on u.S. ships could be used to ratchet up the expectations of Con-
gress and the public for more fighting. "Hell, boys," Johnson said
later in private conversation, "for all I know they could have been
shooting at whales out there."13 Yet even had the attacks taken place,
they were certainly not unprovoked. The ships in the Gulf of Tonkin
were engaged in electronic espionage against North Vietnam. 14
American soldiers and sailors had been placed in harm's way; indeed,
they had been fighting alongside the South Vietnamese army for
years, and performing covert operations along the North Vietnamese
coast for months.
   In bombing North Vietnam in retaliation, Johnson told Congress
and the public that this was meant to be a one-shot operation and
not the start of more extensive involvement. "Our response, for the
present, will be limited and fitting. We Americans know, although
others appear to forget, the risks of spreading conflict. We still seek
no wider war." Yet the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution had been written
with sufficient ambiguity to give Johnson the power to escalate the
war in the future. Apparently, McNamara was delighted that the
administration's blank check had been signed. 15
   After his November landslide victory, accompanied by Democratic
Party majorities in both houses of Congress, Johnson saw an almost
clear road ahead for the enactment of the Great Society's profusion
of domestic initiatives. As Johnson saw it, Vietnam posed the stum-
bling block. There the situation kept deteriorating badly. Many
American soldiers were killed and wounded in Viet Cong attacks on
u.S. installations in September, November, and then on Christmas
eve 1964, and an increasing sense of urgency began to take hold in
Washington. Although Johnson held back from retaliating, the mili-
tary heightened their preparations for bombing North Vietnam and
for sending in ground troops. In a meeting on January 22, however,
Johnson told Congressional leaders that "more u.S. forces are not
needed in South Vietnam short of a decision to go to full-scale war.
The war must be fought by the South Vietnamese. We cannot control
154   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

everything that they do, and we have to count on their fighting their
war."16 Congress itself was baffled about what to do. The State
Department reported to Johnson that "the great majority of con-
gressmen are neither satisfied nor dissatisfied; their thoughts are
fragmented and they are genuinely perplexed. In this state, they are
willing to go along with the people who have the direct responsibility,
the experts in the Executive Branch. "17
   On February 7, 1965, the Viet Cong attacked the u.s. barracks
and helicopter field at Pleiku-killing 9, wounding 126, and destroy-
ing 22 helicopters and aircraft-the heaviest Communist assault so
far on Americans. The United States was clearly becoming more
exposed each day. Facts were being created on the ground. The u.s.
presence created vulnerabilities requiring in turn a greater presence
to defend the soldiers already there.
   In response, Johnson retaliated by bombing the North, but with
a difference. He shifted to a policy of sustained bombing, called
Operation Rolling Thunder. The public viewed the strikes favorably.
In a Gallup Poll, 67 percent approved, 15 percent disapproved, and
18 percent had no opinion. A Harris Poll showed an increase in
johnson's ratings from 41 percent before the retaliation to 60 percent
after. However, telegrams to the White House, presumably from
those who felt most strongly one way or the other, ran twelve-to-one
against retaliation. Indeed, the polls showed that the public was far
from galvanized for war. Only 6 percent thought the fighting was
"very important," 69 percent thought it "not very important," and
20 percent "moderately" SO.18
   As the air war expanded, military pressure grew for sending in
ground troops. Initially, two battalions of Marines were sent to
protect American bases, but in early April 1965, as the situation
continued to worsen, the task shifted from the protection of bases
to engaging in offensive operations. General William Westmoreland,
head of u.s. forces in Vietnam, later wrote, "The adage that a good
offense is the best defense was as applicable in Vietnam as it had
been elsewhere throughout history." 19 Publicly, however, Johnson
denied any change in mission and gave the instruction that "prema-
ture publicity be avoided by all possible precautions. "20 He had no
intention of distracting Congress and the public from the Great
Society, which included, among other things, the new Voting Rights
                                         Falling Off the Edge I 155

Bill. By June, 72,000 American soldiers were in Vietnam, but their
impact on the stability of the South Vietnamese government and its
capacity to fight the war appeared totally insufficient to hold back
defeat.
   Indeed, it seemed as though the American presence only height-
ened North Vietnam's determination to speed toward victory. By
July, it looked like South Vietnam would fall soon. With its demise
predicted within months, Johnson felt inexorably drawn toward
full-scale Americanization of the war. Advised that it would require
425,000 to 600,000 troops by mid-1966, 8-12 billion dollars in
1966 alone, and five years to win, Johnson, on July 28, made the
fateful decision to move forward. He authorized 200,000 troops for
Vietnam by year's end. 21
   Rather than focus public attention on the decision, Johnson placed
his announcement in a midday press conference taken up with other
noteworthy events-the nominations of Abe Fortas to the Supreme
Court and John Chancellor as head of the United States Information
Agency. Deliberately minimizing the significance of the escalation in
Vietnam, he reported an increase to 125,000 troops, and merely
hinted at more. "I have asked the Commanding General, General
Westmoreland, what more he needs to meet this mounting aggres-
sion. He has told me. We will meet his needs. "22 The true expected
costs, in terms of men, time, and money, were concealed.



                  The Sources of Autocratic Action
As a political calculation, Johnson felt compelled to bear the weight
alone and deceive the nation. He believed that he could not afford
to offer his policies up for debate, as some of his advisers suggested.
McNamara and the Joint Chiefs of Staff argued that implementing
a policy to stop the guerilla insurgency and shore up the South
Vietnamese government required clear and unequivocal national
commitment. 23 They advocated an open process that would engage
Congress and the public in facing immediately the costs of the war:
raising taxes, placing the economy on a wartime footing, and mobi-
lizing 235,000 reservists. 24 On February 7, 1965, just after the Viet
Cong attack at Pleiku, but before Johnson's decision to initiate sus-
156   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

tained bombing of the North, McGeorge Bundy, johnson's National
Security Adviser, wrote from Saigon:
  At its very best, the struggle in Vietnam will be long. It seems to us
  important that this fundamental fact be made clear to our people and
  to the people of Vietnam. Too often in the past we have conveyed the
  impression that we expect an early solution when those who live with
  this war know that no early solution is possible. It is our own belief
  that the people of the United States have the necessary will to accept
  and to execute a policy that rests upon the reality that there is no
  short cut to success in South Vietnam. 25

   Far better than his advisers, Johnson understood that getting a
commitment for prolonged fighting would probably have large costs
in terms of Congressional and public time and attention, and his own
informal authority-his professional reputation and his public pres-
tige. All of these resources would be spent at the expense of support
and funding for Great Society programs. Yet for Johnson, the great
opportunity of his presidency lay in achieving social and economic
justice at home, and Vietnam stood in the way of that opportunity.
The nation could hardly be expected to take on both, knowingly.
Johnson, however, wanted both, and autocratic action and decep-
tion-keeping policy development out of the Congressional and pub-
lic arenas-seemed the only ways to get both. He could neither
accept risking the Great Society nor imagine letting South Vietnam
fall. 26
   Johnson's political miscalculation was not just a personal error or
failure of character; it required a permissive context. Congress ceded
responsibility to the President even during the critical decisions of
July 1965 to deploy u.S. soldiers in a ground war. Indeed, Congress
avoided responsibility for policy design and decision by colluding in
Johnson's deception. With the exception of Senate Majority Leader
Mike Mansfield, the other heads of Congress-Senators Dirksen,
Hickenlooper, Kuckel, Long, and Smathers, and Representatives
McCormack, Albert, Arends, Boggs, and Ford-all agreed that the
President should send in U.S. forces by executive decision without
stirring up a big debate in the Congress. They let Johnson bear the
burden. 27
   Autocratic action would ·have been inconceivable had it not been
                                         Falling Off the Edge I 157

for historical trends favoring presidential autonomy in making war.
The Constitution was sufficiently ambiguous about foreign affairs to
provide Presidents with much greater freedom to make decisions
than in the checks and balances of domestic policymaking. 28 And
during two centuries, Presidents had taken advantage of that ambi-
guity, steadily expanding their powers. For example, if a President
could not start a war legally, he could place American troops in a
position where they were likely to be attacked and then fight a
defensive war. Such was Polk's strategy in the 1846 war over Texas
with Mexico, a war recognized, but not declared, by Congress. 29 By
the twentieth century, Presidents were taking quite a few matters into
their own hands. Before leaving office in 1909, Theodore Roosevelt
put it this way: "The biggest matters, such as the Portsmouth peace,
the acquisition of Panama, and sending the fleet around the world,
I managed without consultation with anyone; for when a matter is
of capital importance, it is well to have it handled by one man
only. "30
    In Lyndon Johnson's day, Presidents relied increasingly on their
status as commanders-in-chief to exercise greatly expanded author-
ity.31 World War II and the Cold War had turned the United States
into not only a superpower but the head of the free world. Though
the total war had ended, the sense of emergency remained. When
Truman decided to enter Korea, he opted not even to ask Congress
for a resolution supporting his effort. He stood alone, and Congress
let him. By doing so, Truman and Congress broadened prevailing
assumptions about presidential autonomy. Indeed, they set a prece-
dent by which Congressional debate began to be seen as an aid and
comfort to the enemy.32 Communist aggression appeared to threaten
American values and interests worldwide, creating the demand for
an implacable visage and a huge standing army with military bases
and security arrangements around the globe. The prevailing wisdom
held that only a strong executive could provide such a visage and
control such an apparatus. The United States saw itself in a perpetual
state of crisis, and in the time-compressed era of nuclear weapons,
crisis would require one man to decide whether or not to preempt
or retaliate. 33
    The trend in presidential decisionmaking in foreign policy, begin-
ning with the nation's founding and greatly accelerating in the twen-
158   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

tieth century, led Presidents to hold decisions tightly and involve
Congress and the public only when they felt compelled to do so.
Congress and the public reinforced this trend. 34 They often dissented
or consented (usually the latter) after the fact, and without contrib-
uting much to the formation of policy. They looked to Presidents to
carry the burden of foreign affairs, and some even assumed that
Presidents always had.
   By the 1960s, a prevailing view in Washington claimed that Presi-
dents for two centuries had made as many as 150 "small wars" on
their own. 35 This claim, however, was historically inaccurate, as the
vast majority of these so-called wars were minor efforts to curb
piracy and protect American citizens abroad during local disorder.
Indeed, Congress had rebelled in the past against presidential aggran-
dizement of Congress's Constitutional authority to make war, but
these efforts, some of which Lyndon Johnson would have remem-
bered, backfired badly and reinforced the trend toward autonomous
presidential action. The most salient case occurred in the wake of
World War I, when Congress enacted neutrality legislation that later
prevented Roosevelt from taking action to strengthen the allies
against the Nazis when there may still have been time to prevent
World War II. According to Arthur Schlesinger Jr., "No one for a
long time after would trust Congress with basic foreign policy. Con-
gress did not even trust itself. "36
   Some legislators believed that the Cold War required the President
to carry the load, and others saw political advantage in insulating
themselves from American foreign policy decisions, and debacles. 37
In 1955, when Eisenhower asked for a blank check to defend For-
mosa and "related positions and territories of that area," the Con-
gress overwhelmingly approved. Lyndon Johnson, the Senate
majority leader at the time, declared, "We are not going to take the
responsibility out of the hands of the constitutional leader and try
to arrogate it to ourselves. "38
   Thus, for President Johnson to have approached much differently
his decisionmaking responsibility in Vietnam would have required
either a sea change in the prevailing conception of the President's
responsibilities in foreign affairs, or a very innovative helmsman. An
innovator in the politics of domestic policy, Johnson approached
foreign policy in customary ways. In formulating Vietnam policy,
                                            Falling Off the Edge /      159

Johnson let historical trends convince him of his exclusive, personal
responsibility for the conduct and outcome of the war. Consider the
personalized language of his reasoning:
  Everything I knew about history told me that if I got out of Vietnam
  and let Ho Chi Minh run through the streets of Saigon, then I'd be
  doing what Chamberlain did in World War II. I'd be giving a big fat
  reward to aggression. And I knew that if we let Communist aggression
  succeed in taking over South Vietnam, there would follow in this
  country an endless national debate-a mean and destructive debate-
  that would shatter my Presidency, kill my administration, and damage
  our democracy.39

And again,
  Either way I went it was a terrible situation. I knew that if I ran out
  ... I'd be the first American President to ignore our commitments,
  turn tail and run, and leave our allies in a lurch after all the commit-
  ments Eisenhower had made, and all that SEATO had made, and all
  that the Congress had made, and all that the Tonkin Gulf [Resolution]
  said, and all the statements that Kennedy had made, and Bobby
  Kennedy had made . . . I'd be the first American President to put my
  tail between my legs and run out because I didn't have the courage
  to stand up and support a treaty and support the policy of two other
  Presidents. 4o


               Technical Reasons for Autocratic Action
The presidential trend toward autocratic behavior was based in part
on the various requirements of making foreign policy. First, as the
unfolding of Vietnam policy demonstrated by 1967, dealing abroad
with both friends and foe can be severely compromised by lack of
unity behind the President. A public that is predisposed to defer to
authority and that knows little about the costs of u.s. foreign policy
can be expected to rally around the President. Second, military crisis
requires dispatch. Only a clear chain of command can implement
complex strategy in short order. Third, the intricacies of foreign
affairs require the substantive expertise of experienced professionals.
Only the President and his political and military advisers, immersed
160   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


in the technical details, can be trusted to know what is best. Fourth,
negotiations require decisiveness. International law demands of each
nation a single point of responsible authority.41 Finally, the President
sits at the hub of military and diplomatic channels of information,
some of which are secret. He needs to be able to maintain that
secrecy. As the framers of the Constitution recognized, practical
foreign policy may require autocratic decisionmaking distant from
the turbulence of public debate and legislative politics. Even Thomas
Jefferson, who felt more strongly than most about the dangers of
presidential authority, said in 1790 while serving as George Wash-
ington's Secretary of State, "The transaction of business with foreign
nations is Executive altogether. "42
   Thus, autocratic action makes some sense given the complexities
of foreign affairs. Clearly, as Johnson felt, the President and his
advisers must do the work, and others must follow. Kearns describes
Johnson's reasoning:
  As the Democratic Majority Leader under a Republican President,
  Johnson had supported Eisenhower on most matters of foreign policy.
  He had preached and practiced bipartisanship. Now he was the Presi-
  dent, and he expected the same deference from his Congress. After
  all, partisanship and public debate were enemies of a sound foreign
  policy. It was in the public's best interest-given its tendency every
  now and then to "go off on a jag in one crazy direction or another"-
  to leave complicated questions of international affairs in the hands of
  the President. The public, Johnson reasoned, would only hurt itself
  by knowing too much. Democracy demanded good results for the
  people, not big debates. 43
   Surely, Johnson's view of himself as the solitary decisionmaker, the
sole provider of direction, protection, and order would be appropri-
ate in a routine problem situation and in those foreign policymaking
situations where unity, dispatch, expertise, negotiating authority, and
secrecy are dominant requirements. But in the case of Vietnam, these
requirements were either unachievable or did not apply. First, sus-
tained unity could not be achieved through autocratic action. Rally-
ing around the President provides him at best with a short-term
advantage. The American public has never been deferential in endur-
ing a prolonged war without being convinced of its necessity. And
                                         Falling Off the Edge   /   161

there was little if any evidence to suggest in 1965 that the Vietnam
War would resolve quickly. Furthermore, in the age of television, the
public would not remain ignorant for long. Sustainable unity in
response to the North Vietnamese required ripening the issue and
building consensus, not unilateral decision.
   Second, Vietnam policy did not require split-second decisionmak-
ing. There was time for deliberation. Perhaps, as one senator la-
mented, "the United States, still new to its world role, was unable
to distinguish between genuine emergencies and situations that only
seem to require urgent action. As a result, Congress had acted with
undue haste, assuming, quite wrongly, that it would somehow be
unpatriotic to question the President's judgment in a moment of
assumed emergency. "44
   Third, though the technical complexities of Vietnam policy re-
quired expert and systematic analysis-of international politics, the
resilience and strategy of the South and North Vietnamese govern-
ments, battlefield policy, troop requirements, and the like-the basic
questions of values and priorities were political and not technical.
Only a political process could effectively uncover the values by which
America would judge its President and his policy, and send its chil-
dren to war.
   Fourth, the necessity in international negotiations for a single
point of responsible authority does not reduce the negotiator's need
for support. The negotiator still needs the backing of his multiple
constituencies. Vociferous dissent at home, when it emerged in 1967,
obviously weakened the President's leverage at peace talks. Engaging
early on in a broad-based debate within the nation would not have
diminished Johnson's formal authorization to represent the United
States in negotiations-he was still the President-but it might have
clarified his mandate. Without a mandate, the image of the United
States as a united enemy became an easily exposed charade.
   Finally, the questions posed by the Vietnam War were not the kind
that required secrecy. Was the Vietnam War a just war? Was it worth
the costs? Addressing these issues would hardly have called for
breaches in security. Indeed, analysts and policymakers privy to
secret information could surely have sanitized it for legislative and
public use.
   Thus, the rationale for developing foreign policy by autocratic
162   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


means did not pertain to this case. Vietnam policy required major
investments, trade-offs, losses, and the working out of differing
conceptions of America's role on the world stage. Whether America
chose to go to war or chose to let South Vietnam fall, many Ameri-
cans would have to change their priorities, attitudes, beliefs, and
behavior. War could not be sustained without conviction.
   Franklin Roosevelt faced a similar dilemma in the summer of 1940
when Britain alone fought off the Nazis. Although Roosevelt felt the
urgent need to fight beside Britain, as one of his New Dealers de-
scribes, "Woodrow Wilson had taught him the terrible responsibility
of bringing a divided nation into war. He was going to be sure, very
sure, that, if the United States had to enter the war, it would enter
as far as humanly possible a united nation. "45 Even Roosevelt's
lend-lease exchange of American destroyers for British bases before
the election in 1940 came amid extensive consultation and debate
within the executive branch, between the administration and Con-
gress, across party lines, and with the press. After the election,
Roosevelt put his policy, embodied in the Lend-Lease Bill and other
legislation, through an "arduous, exacting, and uninhibited" Con-
gressional process. 46 Roosevelt identified the adaptive work and
prodded the nation to face and do it. Although he lied during his
1940 campaign about his intention to enter the war, he did not hide
his actions as he prepared for it. 47 Roosevelt paced the challenge, but
unlike Johnson, he did not shield Congress and the public from the
work that only they could do.
  By treating Vietnam in a manner appropriate to technical prob-
lems, Johnson failed to do what he had done so successfully in
domestic affairs----ereate a holding environment for getting others to
share responsibility for tough issues, and for protecting voices of
dissent. For example, he bullied the prescient Mike Mansfield, the
Senate Majority Leader, and J. William Fulbright, Chairman of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Both had grave doubts about
Americanizing the war and predicted trouble with the public.
Johnson, still popular, sarcastically criticized Fulbright in 1965:
"Well, Bill, what have you been doing today to damage the Republic?
You say you've got a bad stomach. Well, that's because you're so
anti-Johnson, lately. I told you that it's bad for you to take out after
me. Now you tell your wife that I love her and I am sorry you're so
damned cranky and grouchy all the time. "48
                                          Falling Off the Edge /    163

   By suppressing people like Fulbright and Mansfield, Johnson de-
terred those who might usefully have provoked debate. By taking the
part of the lone warrior who knows best, Johnson sacrificed the
political tools at his disposal to reality-test his policy. Momentarily,
he may have eased systemic stress and made more room for Great
Society legislation; but he also set the nation and his presidency on
a disastrous course. He failed to recognize that by taking a firm
policy position on a problem in a place about which few people knew
or cared, he squandered his unique position as orchestrator of the
policymaking process. By 1967 he could not manage attention be-
cause attention fastened on him. He could not regulate distress
because he appeared to be the source of distress. Vietnam became
"johnson's War," not Congress's and not the nation's.49


         When Pacing the Work Becomes Work Avoidance
There may be several good reasons to avoid or delay the distress,
conflict, and learning required to do adaptive work. First, if the issue
does not represent an immediate threat, delay may permit giving
priority to more important issues. Second, if the challenge over-
whelms the society's ability to adapt, delay may not only reduce
destructive disequilibrium but may also provide time to strengthen
the society's problem-solving abilities. The former reason, more rele-
vant in the case of Vietnam, played a role in Johnson's thinking.
   Hoping to bring Ho Chi Minh quickly to the bargaining table,
Johnson thought he might find an early solution and avoid altogether
turning the issue into an adaptive challenge for the nation. At a
minimum, he thought he could delay the day of reckoning and create
time for Great Society legislation. As he described later, "I was
determined to keep that war from shattering that dream, which
meant 1 simply had no choice but to keep my foreign policy in the
wings."so
   Tragically, he assumed too much. Ho Chi Minh was not another
senator who could be brought to terms by the proper sequence of
sticks and carrots. And success on the Great Society required more
than legislation passed before the closing of a window of opportu-
nity. A plethora of domestic legislation was no substitute for chang-
ing public values, attitudes, and behavior toward long-term domestic
problems. johnson's programs demanded ongoing public and admin-
164   I   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

istrative leadership.51 By becoming consumed as the personal em-
bodiment of Vietnam policy, Johnson lost his concentration and his
power to move that agenda forward beyond legislation. Ironically,
by hiding his war policy decisions from Congress and the public to
protect the domestic agenda, Johnson presented them with a war
that eventually thwarted work on that agenda.
   Vietnam policymaking unwittingly created more disequilibrium
than the public could tolerate. Along with changes wrought by the
civil rights movement and the sexual revolution of the 1960s, the
distress took many forms, including splintered families, universities,
and communities, riots and repressive policing measures, and work
avoidance of various sorts (drug abuse, dropping out, and vilifying
all structures of authority). The trust in authority so necessary to
regulate distress had been spent.
   Any President wrestling with a multiplicity of issues at once must
highlight some issues in relation to others in an attempt to pace the
work of the nation on its full assortment of issues, domestic and
foreign. Some issues have to be put on hold, or glossed over. In this
sense, presidential leadership must always pace and sequence issues
according to value and ripeness. 52 Undoubtedly, Johnson was trying
to organize the work of the nation by focusing public attention on
domestic issues rather than foreign. But wars, once begun, galvanize
attention. The pain they generate cannot be hidden. By 1967 the
public had begun to work the issue on its own, in opposition to the
President, in an explosive and deafening debate uncontained and
unorchestrated by presidential authority. By losing the public's trust
and by letting it become his war, Johnson had sabotaged his own
capacity to lead the nation in its conflict.
   In directing attention to one set of issues and not another, Johnson
attempted to sequence the multiple issues facing the nation. But he
did not seem to have a strategy to pace the adaptive work on
Vietnam, per see Pacing is a means to prepare people for tackling
hard questions, a tactic used in a larger strategy of facing the issues.
Pacing might resemble work avoidance because both can involve
deception. But the deception associated with pacing is a temporary
tactic while seeking opportunities to turn parts of the work over to
people as they demonstrate their readiness. Johnson, however, had
no strategy to strengthen their readiness or to direct Congress and
                                         Falling Off the Edge /   165

the nation to work the issue of Vietnam when conditions allowed.
Indeed, as the war dragged on, he suppressed conflict and remained
the sale decisionmaker. His was not a tactic but a strategy of circum-
vention.


                   Having to Know the Answers
Johnson had said that democracy demanded results and not debates.
From his domestic policy experience, he knew better. He knew how
to make democracy work precisely because he knew how to orches-
trate conflicting points of view on the challenges facing people. As
he put it, "The task of responsible leadership ... is to avoid irrec-
oncilable positions. "53 According to Joseph Califano, his aide for
domestic affairs, Johnson "was a political and intellectual baker,
kneading with those enormous hands until every aspect of the pro-
posal was explored; once confident of that, he would put the bread
in the oven." 54
   At home, Johnson had been a master of the politics of inclusion.
He found (and invented) ways to get people involved in testing
propositions and solving problems. Like the conductor of a sym-
phony, he would mobilize people to work the issues and play their
part. That way, he kept his hands on the baton. He could step back
and lead the process, sensing its ebbs and flows, identifying which
issues needed developing, which were ready to play, and what en-
semble could be brought together.
   But Johnson viewed foreign policy as a job for technical experts,
not as a proper realm for the politics of inclusion. Forsaking his
political strengths in turning Congress and the nation to face prob-
lems instead of running from them, Johnson allowed himself to be
swept along in the vortex of exaggerated expectations about the role
of the chief executive. Furthermore, his strong personal need to
dominate most situations, which had been disciplined by legislative
politics into exceptional mastery of the participative process, now
stood untethered in an unfamiliar context with traditions and norms
that reinforced dominance. 55 As President, he was supposed to domi-
nate foreign affairs.
   The coupling of these two factors-his personal need to dominate
and the prevailing trends in foreign policymaking-sharply limited
166   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


Johnson's freedom to raise hard questions and prevented him from
engaging in a mode of learning with his political colleagues and with
the nation. Indeed, for Johnson to stand before the nation and
present the facts as he knew them seemed an unthinkable form of
political suicide. To throw an open question to the public or Con-
gress would easily be seen either as weak or as a dereliction of
presidential duty.
   In fact, many participants and observers of these events have asked
themselves, years later, what sort of speech might they have written
for Johnson. By and large, they come up blank. 56 The reason, I think,
is telling. Even in retrospect, analysts seem to assume that Johnson's
tasks would be, first, to find a policy solution and, second, to per-
suade the public. This assumption reflects the constraint on leading
from a position of authority. Even in our retrospective analyses, we
cannot imagine a President raising hard questions to which he has
no decisive answers.


                           Placing Oneself
Any authority figure must decide where to place himself in relation
to an issue. 57 In general, he has three strategic options: (1) circum-
vention, with the risk of backing into a potential crisis; (2) frontal
challenge-getting out in front and becoming the "bearer of bad
tidings" by introducing the crisis; or (3) riding the wave-staying
just in front of the crisis, anticipating the wave and trying to direct
its power as it breaks.
   On the issue of civil rights, Johnson took the third option. He saw
the wave. He had seen it coming ever since the Supreme Court ruled
in 1954 to desegregate schools. Rather than back into the crisis and
fall behind the issue, and rather than get out in front of the issue by
making public declarations on behalf of civil rights, he worked
behind the scenes as President to prepare for and shape the distress.
When the wave hit, he was ready. Not only were his speechwriters
prepared but so was his Justice Department, which was responsible
for drafting civil rights legislation, and so was Congress.
   Yet on Vietnam Johnson used the first strategy, circumvention. He
backed into the crisis. When the nation discovered that it was in an
unexpected and costly war, people felt tricked, betrayed, misled. He
                                          Falling Off the Edge   / 167

neither prepared behind the scenes for the crisis, as he had with civil
rights, nor did he get out in front early on to prepare the nation at
large, as Ruckelshaus had in Tacoma. Either course of action seemed
to jeopardize the domestic programs Johnson held dear.
   Had Johnson exercised leadership in Vietnam, he may still have
suffered defeat. Leadership is no guarantee of survival. Quite the
opposite. But in situations demanding adaptive work, the exercise of
leadership may increase the odds of survival. At least that is the hope.
What would leadership in Johnson's situation have looked like? A
few speculations seem in order.
   Rather than circumvent Congress and the public, Johnson might
have used variations of the other two strategies. One frontal strategy
might have taken the form of a major address, shortly after his
election in 1964, laying out the problem to Congress and the public:
the pros and cons of involvement in Vietnam, the probabilities and
the costs, in terms of war, American foreign policy, and the domestic
agenda. Johnson would have taken a lot of heat, perhaps quite a bit
more than Ruckelshaus, who took plenty of heat for going out to
Tacoma. But after his major electoral victory, Johnson would have
had time to recover from a possible setback in popularity. Had he
held steady, refusing to be pushed until the issue had ripened, he may
have found himself with a sufficient consensus for a policy the nation
could live with. Of course, the policy may not have conformed to
the expert opinion of his advisers, but adaptive work often requires
giving up a measure of "expert" control over the outcome. Indeed,
what is clear in retrospect about Johnson's Vietnam strategy is that
the outcome may have been better if Johnson's own questions, and
the questions raised by some of his policy advisers, had been wrestled
more fully to the mat.
   Such a strategy, however, would very likely have cost Johnson in
just the currency he hated most to pay: legislative attention to the
Great Society. To face the country with the trade-offs it would take,
Johnson would have needed to face and accept at least the partial
loss of his own grand aspiration-a daunting personal task for any-
one so determined as he.
   Another frontal strategy, perhaps far more protective of his do-
mestic agenda, might have used the campaign of 1964 to construct
a mandate to get out of the war: to "let Asian boys fight an Asian
168 /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


war." As it was, public opinion was not very strong in either direc-
tion. In the spring of 1964, more than two thirds of Americans said
they paid little or no attention to events in Vietnam. 58 Thus, Johnson
probably had the opportunity to frame and ripen the issue in these
terms, particularly with so hawkish a foil as Barry Goldwater. In-
deed, Johnson had appealed successfully to antiwar sentiment in
attacking Goldwater. But instead of following through on that ap-
peal, Johnson felt pulled by Goldwater's position toward taking a
more aggressive stance; hence, the timing of the Gulf of Tonkin
incident three months before the election.
   Ironically, a political campaign ought to be just the proper time to
engage the public in issues of public policy; that's when people are
paying attention. Yet in trying to meet the multiple expectations of
multiple constituents, candidates tend to downplay the hard issues,
telling voters what they want to hear rather than challenging them
to face the need for adjustments in their lives and hard trade-offs in
their candidates. No doubt, constructing a mandate against the war
might have lost Johnson some votes, but every poll and indicator at
the time suggested that Johnson was way ahead of Goldwater and
had a wide margin of safety-indeed, a landslide margin. He had the
opening to get himself a mandate that would provide some protec-
tion in the future for his domestic agenda if and when South Vietnam
might fal1. 59 Johnson's fear of giving up any vote, hawkish or other-
wise, prevented him from using the campaign to build a consensus,
however. After losing and winning elections by a hair during his
career, Johnson did not take chances. 6o And he wanted to be as
popular as his predecessor, whose cruel death stirred immense, retro-
active popularity.
   Losses accompanied this strategy, as well. To get the nation to face
the likely fall of South Vietnam, Johnson would have had to face
that loss himself, something he and most of his advisers were unwill-
ing to do. It was one thing for France to be defeated by Ho Chi
Minh's movement; it was another thing altogether for the free world
superpower to leave in humiliation. On June 28, 1965, for example,
Undersecretary of State George Ball wrote Johnson a memorandum
that provided a basis for getting out. It was initially titled, "A Plan
for Cutting our Losses in South Viet-Nam." Militarily, Ball asserted,
"the terrain in south Viet-Nam could not be worse ... This is clearly
                                          Falling Off the Edge /    169

what General de Gaulle described to me as a 'rotten country' . . .
Politically, South Viet-Nam is a lost cause. The country is bled white
from twenty years of war and the people are sick of it . . . South
Viet-Nam is a country with an army and no government." But the
next day Johnson's advisers assailed the memorandum as too ex-
treme, causing Ball to shift his emphasis from withdrawal to nego-
tiation, and to resubmit his new, less alarming memorandum with
the new title" A Compromise Solution. "61 The loss was unthinkable.
   Adopting the third strategic option-riding the wave-might also
have allowed Johnson to stay ahead of the crisis, but by externalizing
the conflict. To prevent its becoming "johnson's War," Johnson
might have gone behind the scenes to stimulate conflictive work on
Vietnam without being at its center. He might have encouraged
hawks and doves in Congress to generate a debate, sweating over
the trade-offs. Given his political dexterity, Johnson could probably
have orchestrated such a debate to provide himself both with cover
and with options not to be found with his small team of policy
experts operating in relative isolation. He might have engineered a
serious discussion even before the Gulf of Tonkin incident, weighing
the costs and benefits of various courses of action. Given the infor-
mation and military projections at the time, Congress could have
decided to commit itself to prosecute the war fully to its conclusion,
to pull out entirely before its Americanization, or to take a middle
road. A debate might have brought people to share responsibility for
choosing an option. In this manner, Johnson might have let Congress
introduce the issue and take some of the heat. This would have
followed in the vein of his political experience. As Johnson told Jim
Rowe, a long-time political friend and adviser, "Just remember our
old friend [Texas Congressman] Maury Maverick isn't here any
more. Maury got too far ahead of his people, and I'm not going to
do that. "62
   All of these options would have required Johnson to face loss and
to prepare others for it. The unthinkable had to be thought. Some-
thing had to give. To varying degrees, each strategy would likely have
its costs in terms of both the Great Society and American conceptions
of role and foreign interest. But if the nation could not find it within
itself to render a commitment to a potentially protracted war, it
would have been better for Johnson to have known early on.
170   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

   On Vietnam policy, Johnson fell off the razor's edge because he
acted authoritatively when no authoritative decision was appropri-
ate. By making the President the decisionmaker instead of the leader
of the nation's problem-solving, Johnson lost his vantage point and
his leverage over the holding environment. 63 He could not regulate
distress, direct attention, or distribute responsibility. He could not
protect voices of leadership without authority because, by coupling
his own authority to the issue, each dissident voice became a threat
to his power. By giving Vietnam policy questions low priority-half
hidden from the public and Congress-he unwittingly let them ripen
by the natural chaotic processes of emergency and crisis. Having lost
his ability to direct the heat and attention the war unleashed,
Johnson took all the heat and sacrificed his presidency.

                     The Fall of Richard Nixon
Johnson's successor also lost his presidency in the context of Viet-
nam. 64 The same trends toward autocratic action that shaped
Johnson's foreign policymaking shaped Richard Nixon's as well.
Indeed, the pressures on Nixon were worse. Johnson bequeathed a
nation divided and distressed, which could only have increased the
pressures on Nixon to come up authoritatively with his solution to
the Vietnam War. He would achieve peace with honor. He would
end the war so that it would not have been in vain. Both pro-war
and anti-war factions could unite behind this goal. And though
perhaps no President could achieve it, Nixon would try.
   During the first several months of his presidency, Nixon repeatedly
expressed his desire to pull the country together. "His would be a
government of national unity. "65 But unity at home required peace
in Vietnam. Using the classical model-I'm the leader here; leave it
to met-Nixon entered the White House thinking he knew better
than Johnson the way to bring Ho Chi Minh to the bargaining table.
After all, Nixon was far more expert on matters of foreign policy
than Johnson had been. With massive, secret, and unauthorized
bombing of North Vietnamese sanctuaries in neutral Cambodia
(which Johnson had not allowed), bold threats of "measures of great
consequence and force," and secret diplomacy, Nixon expected to
deliver a rapid peace. 66 He had said during the election, "How do
                                           Falling Off the Edge    I 171

you bring a war to a conclusion? I'll tell you how Korea was ended
... Eisenhower let the word go out-let the word go out diplomati-
cally-to the Chinese and the North [Koreans]-that he would not
tolerate this continual ground war of attrition. And within a matter
of months they negotiated. "67
    Nixon set a deadline of November 1969 for a breakthrough on
the war. But when his efforts to end it seemed only to produce an
expanded war in Cambodia, domestic opposition intensified. Dem-
onstrations multiplied across the land. Hundreds of thousands
marched in Washington. Nixon, in turn, attempted to turn the po-
larity to his political advantage. The politics of unity gave way to
the politics of division. Vice-President Spiro Agnew called it "positive
polarization."68 On November 3, 1969, in his speech to the "silent
majority," Nixon claimed to represent the orienting values of Amer-
ica against a misguided but vocal minority trying to "impose" its
values by "mounting demonstrations in the streets."69
    Viewing domestic opposition as an enemy, Nixon tried to suppress
it. Against his public opposition, he intensified domestic surveillance
by the FBI and the CIA.70 And in the face of Congressional opposi-
tion, he instructed his staff that there would be no more "screwing
around." "Don't worry about divisiveness. Having drawn the sword,
don't take it out-stick it in hard. "71
    By 1972 President Nixon, his advisers, the press, and numerous
political factions in America had developed an "us versus them"
model as a basis for analyzing events and making decisions. As
Nixon's speechwriter tells it:

  The election of 1968, and the reaction to the events of the first half
  of Nixon's first term, confirmed in the minds of the President and his
  most trusted advisers that: 1. "We" would never have an appeal to
  "them," and it was a waste of time trying to win them over or appease
  them. 2. "They" could be useful to "us," as the villain, the object
  against which all of our supporters, as well as those who might
  become our supporters, could be rallied. 3. Our forum was the Presi-
  dency, and their forum was the Eastern Establishment press, and since
  they "managed" the news we would be better off discrediting the news
  media. 4. "We" were on the side of the right, representing the will of
  the people in a democracy, and majoritarians had the duty to identify
172   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY


  and overcome the anti-democratic elitists. There was disagreement
  within the Administration about all of these theses, particularly about
  the intensity with which we should fight the press, but there was little
  dissent on the assumption that lay beneath all of them: that it was
  "them" against "us" on nearly everything. 72

   Nixon would render the differences vivid between "us" and
"them" by emphasizing that only he could have done the things he
would do. Only he could accomplish breakthroughs with both Red
China and the Soviet Union. Only Nixon had the know-how to do
the work facing the nation. Nixon would dazzle the country with
his virtuoso performances. According to his speechwriter, "'Only
Nixon Could Have' came up again in memos Nixon stimulated
Haldeman to write, paving the way for dealings with the Soviets on
SALT with a minimum of reaction from the far right, which might
have presented a President of more liberal mien with a considerable
problem ... Nixon's ability to bring along the right-wing, grumbling
but with 'no place else to go,' 'was seen to be one of his greatest
strengths. "73
   However, Nixon's defensive and imperious conduct eventually
alienated even his political allies in Washington. "I believe in the
battle, whether it's the battle of a campaign or the battle of this office
... It's always there wherever you go. I, perhaps, carry it more than
others because that's my way. "74 Secretive behavior reinforced the
public's latent fears that Nixon could not be trusted, dating from his
earliest years in politics. Nixon's distrust generated distrust, which
reinforced his own and perpetuated the vicious cycle. As one of his
aides later described, "Gradually, as we drew the circle closer around
us, the ranks of 'them' began to swell. "75
   Watergate was the culmination of autocratic behavior gone awry.
The events are well known. A group of White House spies and
operatives, acting in the main against anti-Vietnam War protesters
like Daniel Ellsberg, who had leaked the Pentagon Papers in June
1971, turned its efforts toward Nixon's reelection campaign in the
winter of 1972. 76 With neither economic nor war-related good news
to tell, Nixon's popularity had fallen badly. In January, the polls were
showing him running neck and neck against Senator Edmund Muskie
at 41 percent each. 77 To try to reverse this trend, Nixon's men
                                          Falling Off the Edge   I 173

sabotaged Muskie's campaign and later, in June, burglarized Demo-
cratic Party headquarters located in the Watergate Hotel and Office
Complex in Washington, D.C. Within a week of the burglary, Nixon
signed on to covering it up. At first the cover-up succeeded; the
burglary did not interfere with Nixon's landslide reelection victory.
Within a little more than two years, however, as the story unraveled
and the facts became known, the House of Representatives drew up
articles of impeachment and Nixon resigned. 78


                    The Costs of Going It Alone
President Nixon violated a trust: he lied to the public, blatantly, out
of self-interest, and was found out. A cover-up might be justifiable
in times of war for purposes of national security, but not for stealing
campaign secrets. Nixon sabotaged not only the Democratic Party,
but also the very basis of his formal presidential authority: repre-
senting the law of the land. 79 Most significantly, he added greatly to
Johnson's damage of the institution of the presidency itself, and
therefore to a vital component of the national holding environment
for doing adaptive work in the future. The institution lost credibility,
weakening the network of informal authority relations based on trust
between the citizens and their government. Instead of providing a
backstop of cohesion in a land already frayed by war and acute social
change, the presidency got drawn into the division. The damaged
institution could no longer provide a key source of reliability to a
troubled people so that they might continue to work on the country's
most difficult problems. Held more weakly, the nation fled from this
work. Indeed, it seems inconceivable that anyone could begin to
analyze the successes and failures of America during the last twenty
years without accounting for the impact of this damage. The Los
Angeles riots of 1992 are but one symptom of work long avoided.
   Operating by the lone warrior model of leadership, Nixon circum-
vented Congress, the public, and even his own advisers in the execu-
tive branch. 80 Nixon believed that he could, if left alone, solve the
problem in Vietnam and usher in an era of more peaceful coexistence
with communist nations. He understood that the rift between the
Soviets and the Chinese provided an opportunity to play one off
against the other. He also knew that a nation with a quarter of the
174   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

world's population could not remain unrecognized. And he knew
that secrecy was critical to managing these relationships, for neither
the Chinese nor the Soviets would enter into serious negotiations
without trusting that the American government could maintain se-
crecy.81
   But did the need for secrecy preclude all options for getting the
public to come to terms with a changing view of communist coun-
tries, or its investment and losses in Vietnam? Did the President have
no role to play in the public's adaptive work on foreign affairs?
Nixon had cause for pride in his technical mastery of foreign pol-
icy-the opening to China and detente with the Soviet Union. But
ultimately the success of his foreign policy would rest on domestic
opinion. Detente and arms control with the Soviets would rest on
the capacity of the public and Congress to make sense out of these
apparent reversals. After all, how was the country supposed to react
to presidential friendlinesses with the Chinese and the Soviets when
two generations of Americans had learned to hate and fear the
communists and thousands of their children were now dying for the
cause of anticommunism in Southeast Asia? Television pictures all
at once showing scenes of war in Vietnam along with President
Nixon smiling and toasting Mao Zedong and Leonid Brezhnev posed
a first order challenge to our values, attitudes, and behavior. To view
foreign policymaking as work directed abroad discounted badly the
seriousness of the adaptive work required at home.
   Changing American attitudes would have required at least some
appreciation for the public's debate. But Nixon viewed public debate
as a threat. He preferred "silent" majorities. Viewing the public's
unrest as a menace, rather than as an opportunity for adaptive work,
Nixon responded defensively. And from a technical point of view, he
was right: division at home did provide aid and comfort to the
enemy. Ironically, however, his "us versus them" defensiveness may
well have strengthened the North Vietnamese conviction that Amer-
ica would remain a house divided and could be defeated. Unwit-
tingly, he may have added fuel to the conflict.
   Nixon adopted an "us versus them" outlook not only as a product
of his character, although that was critical. Us versus them described
the social and emotional currents of the Cold War. Bumper stickers
across the nation read: "America: Love It or Leave It." Nearly
                                          Falling Off the Edge /    175

everyone seemed up in arms during the Vietnam era. The dissension
within the nation had already brought down one President. Nixon's
personality and public life fell in quite naturally with this polarizing
trend. 82
   Thus, two powerful forces reinforced Nixon's predilection toward
autocratic behavior: the polarizing trends of the Vietnam years and
the historical trends toward presidential autonomy in foreign affairs
heightened during the Cold War. The mesh of these forces with
Nixon's insular style produced imperial behavior that cut consis-
tently across foreign and domestic policy.83
    Hence, ascribing Nixon's downfall solely to character is too easy.
Nixon's leadership philosophy-leaders lead and followers follow-
was not much different from Lyndon johnson's leadership strategy
in foreign affairs. Both Presidents acted like technicians. Both iden-
tified leadership with giving answers, treating Vietnam as a technical
problem that foreign policy and military expertise could solve with
the help of some political manipulation. Both took the work on their
own shoulders rather than shift the burden of grappling with the
issues to Congress. Both fell into the trap of isolating themselves on
the point and ignoring the adaptive work of their relevant publics.
Both viewed contention as an impediment rather than as a sign of a
society contending with an adaptive challenge. By isolating them-
selves from the political process, both lost critical opportunities to
reality-test their technical, political, and moral assessments of war
policy in Vietnam and, for Nixon, in Cambodia as well. Neither of
them used their capacity as President to dominate public attention
in a strategy to coordinate the public's engagement with the issues,
or stimulate, enrich, and advance the public argument. Both squan-
dered the holding environment of the presidency, and thus their
power to regulate distress. Neither treated political leadership on
Vietnam policy as the politics of inclusion. Nixon was simply more
consistent.
   Nixon used a variation of Johnson's circumvention strategy-try-
ing to subvert and control the crisis-in the hope of arranging a
grand technical fix, sooner than later. Instead, he might have em-
braced the public unrest, claimed it as a sign of democracy, and used
his office to moderate its intensity and clarify the issues. Rather than
isolate himself from the public debate, taking the attacks personally
176   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

and defensively, Nixon might have reached out to the public and to
Congress. For example, he could have moderated a presidential series
of discussions on nationwide television between heads of prowar and
antiwar factions on the practicalities of the war in the context of
emerging trends in Soviet and Chinese affairs, or on the moral
dilemmas posed by the war. He could have raised his own questions
and offered perspectives given his expertise and vantage point as
President. Or he might have challenged Congress to give him a clear
mandate, one way or another-to share policymaking responsibility.
By claiming democracy rather than defending himself against it,
Nixon might have sent more coherent international messages about
America. Instead, he demonized the conflict and played to the unin-
volved. 84
   Using his office to coordinate the public debate on Vietnam would
have required going against the grain of both his personal inclination
and prevailing presidential trends toward seizing control, but it also
might have provided Nixon with better options than those he and
Kissinger invented, despite their considerable prowess. Such a public
debate also might have clarified the domestic viability of their poli-
cies. Would America be willing to leave soldiers in Vietnam to en-
force a treaty? When South Vietnam began to fall within a year of
Nixon's resignation, America balked, and not simply because the
people had lost its faith in government after Watergate. Rather, the
people had also lost their interest in fighting the war. They wanted
to cut their losses. Having been unprepared from the beginning and
misled repeatedly during the war about its costs, the nation had had
enough. Peace was barely at hand and never in the bag. 85 Nixon had
done little to prepare people for the sustained commitment that
"peace with honor" would require, even if it were attainable.
   The tragedy of Nixon's downfall is not only the tragedy of one
man. The tragedy is the work neglected. 86 Political ousters sometimes
function in part as avoidance mechanisms, providing society with a
false or incomplete diagnosis (it was all the "leader's" fault) and a
diversion from its own adaptive work still to be faced. Anti-Nixon
fervor was not all avoidance. Watergate represented the outcome of
an imperial trend in the presidency that had taken over not just
foreign policy but also domestic affairs. That trend and the abuses
of power that came with it had to be stopped, if possible. The
                                          Falling Off the Edge   /   177

Watergate hearings were Congress's mechanism for reasserting its
relevance and its Constitutional authority. Yet the hearings not only
attempted to reverse a trend, they also served to deflect attention-
probably unwittingly-from the domestic demands of foreign affairs,
including the wounds of the war. For example, in 1973 and 1974,
while the nation sat transfixed at the spectacle of the Watergate
hearings on television, tens of thousands of soldiers returned unwel-
corned from Vietnam, beginning years of neglect and inner torment. 87
Rather than face these men and the reality of our first major lost
war, many of us watched Congress's gladiator fight. This is not to
suggest that the hearings themselves were at fault or that they should
have been conducted differently. Americans might have looked any-
where for a diversion from the issues embodied by the soldiers'
returning. As a columnist noted in late 1975, "Today it is almost as
though the war never happened. Americans have somehow blocked
it out of their consciousness. They don't talk about it. They don't
talk about its consequences. "88 Vietnam was barely mentioned in the
presidential campaign of 1976. 89 It took us nearly a decade before
we even began to face the sacrifices, mistakes, and costs of the
Vietnam War, before we began to build monuments, make documen-
taries and films, embrace the soldiers who fought the war, and
capture its lessons.


                       Presidential Leadership
The framers of the Constitution had in mind the transformation of
executive authority from an imperial monarchy to a constrained
presidency. By forcing the President to share powers with the legis-
lature and the courts and by rendering his officeholding contingent
on public opinion, they intended to force his attention to the views
of others. Presidential action, it was hoped, would pay high regard
in its synthesis to the conflicting values, priorities, beliefs, and be-
haviors of a diverse nation facing adaptive hurdles everyday.
   In a sense, the presidency as an institution embodied a revolution-
ary conception of executive leadership. And no wonder; it emerged
from the antiauthoritarian sentiment of the new and rebellious na-
tion. No longer were people to look up to the solitary silverback-
the monarch-for decisive answers to the problems of direction,
178   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

protection, orientation, conflict, and the care of norms. The colonists
had grown tired of being misled by rulers whose visions came from
within. They wanted public officials whose visions were derived or
shaped from without. Presidential perspectives had to be reality-
tested against a multiplicity of views. Presidential action would re-
quire collaboration.
   Ironically, with the emergence of America's dominant role in twen-
tieth-century world affairs and the domestic stresses generated by
that role, the presidency reverted, in varying degrees, to the imperial
mode. 90 Under the Cold War pressures to provide a more traditional
kind of leadership, Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy took on more
autocratic styles of behavior in foreign policy.91 Congress and the
public as a whole expected technical expertise and autocratic poli-
cymaking in the guise of leadership, and that is what they got. In a
time of prolonged distress, our gaze became fastened on authority,
shaping both the actions and selection of Presidents. By the time
Johnson and Nixon came on the scene, the stage was set for tragedy.
   The Constitutional design for presidential leadership seemed emi-
nently suited to a nation facing adaptive work, yet the renewal of
that design now became in its own right an adaptive challenge.
Following Watergate, Jimmy Carter tried, in some ways, to meet that
challenge. His presidency offers a complex picture of an authority
still operating too much like the technician, yet trying to move
toward a more honest encounter with the public.
   On one hand, Jimmy Carter saw himself as the provider of well-
engineered policy answers. His very education as an engineer may
have left him ill-prepared to understand the adaptive requirements
of policies, and therefore the need for collaboration and pacing.
Having campaigned for President as an anti-Washington outsider, he
began and remained a President with a weak set of relationships with
members of Congress. He did not understand their role in public
problem-solving or their ways. In his first months in the White
House, he launched a slew of major policy initiatives toward a
Congress not eager, after Watergate, to take orders from anybody,
and ill-equipped to digest so much so fast. 92
   On the other hand, Carter tried, without great skill but coura-
geously, to challenge the nation to face problems of both values and
habits. On July 15, 1979, during the revolution in Iran, he gave his
                                         Falling Off the Edge   / 179

address on oil policy. In it he challenged Americans to face their
"moral and spiritual crisis" in which self-indulgence and consump-
tion endangered the values of family, community, and faith. In our
society, he suggested, "human identity is no longer defined by what
one does but by what one owns." Yet "owning things and consuming
things do not satisfy our longing for meaning." Later in the speech,
he discussed the oil crisis and became more concrete in his proposals.
He asked Americans "to take no unnecessary trips, to use car pools
or public transportation whenever you can, to park your car one
extra day per week, to obey the speed limit, and to set your thermo-
stats to save fuel."93 Both messages seemed to go over badly.94 Jour-
nalists branded it the "malaise" speech. Although Carter may have
spent months thinking about these issues, feeling them through, with
the benefit of a final ten-day retreat at Camp David with scholars
and politicians, he neglected to lead the public through a similar
learning process by which its views and sense of responsibility would
change. Instead, Carter merely delivered the answers.
   But perhaps it was less his surprising speech than his subsequent
actions which caused further erosion of the public's perception of his
leadership ability. The day after his speech, Carter asked for the
resignation of his entire Cabinet and senior White House staff, an
event unseen since President Tyler's day in the 1840s. By doing so,
he followed one distressing event with another. After challenging the
nation in its values and its pocketbooks, the President created chaos
and confusion at the top of the government. The chaos at the top
deflected the public's attention away from the problems addressed in
his speech and onto the ineptness, once again, in post-Watergate
Washington. Unwittingly, Carter weakened an already injured hold-
ing environment. He tacitly communicated that the authority struc-
ture, the containing vessel, had not done its job, and worse, that he
had made serious errors of executive judgment in choosing whom to
authorize. Carter needed to look ahead to maintaining a steady
course after delivering a disturbing speech that pressed people to
examine their consumerism and extravagance as factors in the energy
shortages. He needed to give people time to incorporate the chal-
lenge. As Johnson demonstrated in his response to a distressed nation
during events in Selma, in the midst of a teaching moment one has
to hold steady. Disorder at the top is perhaps the last thing people
180   /   LEADING WITH AUTHORITY

want to see when the distress of change compels them to seek greater
reliability in their authorities.
   President Carter may have believed in facing people with hard
problems, but he seemed not to know how. That was not entirely
his fault: strategies for orchestrating adaptive work-even if modeled
in some ways by Franklin Roosevelt or Lyndon Johnson-had never
become part of conventional wisdom on leadership, or even a major
focus of research. 95
   Authority constrains leadership because in times of distress people
expect too much. They form inappropriate dependencies that isolate
their authorities behind a mask of knowing. And then everyone
rationalizes the dependency. As some senators put it during the
Vietnam era, democracy is awkward in an age of crisis. 96 And in our
time of global change, everything ends up feeling like a crisis, even
when it is not. As a result, doubt, the exchange of ideas, weighing
contrary values, collaborative work, the testing of vision against
competing views, changing one's mind, seem like unaffordable luxu-
ries. Raise hard questions and one risks getting cut down, even if the
questions are important for moving forward on the problem. Thus,
the need for leadership from people in authority becomes ever more
critical during periods of disequilibrium, when people's urgency for
answers increases. Yet that role is played badly if authorities rein-
force dependency and delude themselves into thinking that they have
to have the answers when they do not. Feeling pressured to know,
they will surely come up with an answer, even if poorly tested,
misleading, and wrong.
     Part III

Leading Without
   Authority
                                   8
                  Creative Deviance
                  on the Frontline
  We see leadership too rarely exercised from high office, and the
  constraints that come with authority go far to explain why. In public
  life, people generally look to their authorities to solve problems with
  a minimum of pain, and where pain must be endured, they often
  expect their officials to find somebody else to bear the costs. In the
  1990s, we hear across the country, "Cut the deficit-but don't raise
  my taxes, raise his." "Cut military spending, but don't close my
  factory or my army base." Many of us want change, "but not in my
  back yard," a syndrome so common that it has a name: NIMBY.l
  Our politicians find it very hard to raise tough questions at election
  time because their constituents insist on protection. When we do
  elect activists, we want them to change the thinking and behavior of
  other people, rarely our own. We can hardly blame our public
  officials for giving us what we ask for.
     The scarcity of leadership from people in authority, however,
  makes it all the more critical to the adaptive successes of a polity
  that leadership be exercised by people without authority. These peo-
  ple-perceived as entrepreneurs and deviants, organizers and trouble-
  makers-provide the capacity within the system to see through the
  blind spots of the dominant viewpoint. 2 Often they remain relatively
  unknown, like Marie Foster or Bernard Lafayette, key activists in
, 1960s Selma; and sometimes they begin with no authority and even-
  tually gain broad informal authority, as did Martin Luther King Jr.,
  Mohandas K. Gandhi, and Margaret Sanger. People such as these
                                   183
184   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

push us to clarify our values, face hard realities, and seize new
possibilities, however frightening change may be. Of course, if they
have no means to compensate for their own blind spots, they can
mislead us just as badly as anyone in authority.
   Because we are not used to distinguishing between leadership and
authority, the idea of leadership without authority is new and per-
plexing. As a result, the person without authority gets few relevant
pointers from scholarship. Analysts have generally neglected the
distinctive problems and opportunities of mobilizing work from
positions of little or no authority. Thus, nearly all studies of leader-
ship, in addition to many histories, focus primarily on figures of
authority. Just as social systems organize themselves in relation to a
structure of authority, focusing attention at the head of the table,
our social commentators do so as well. Leadership may more often
emerge from the foot of the table, but that is not where we spend
most of our time looking. We study the lives and characteristics of
heads of state and CEOs of corporations, assuming all the while that
we are studying leaders and not simply authority figures who serve
the social functions of direction, protection, and order, sometimes in
adaptive situations that demand their leadership, and sometimes in
routine situations that do not.
   That I use the metaphor of the table, with the head traditionally
a man and the foot characteristically a woman is no accident. Lead-
ership without authority has been the domain to which women have
been restricted for ages. Even today, Congress remains over 90 per-
cent men, and we are only beginning to imagine seriously the election
of a woman President in our time. Having been denied formal
authority roles in most societies, some women have learned strategies
for leading without authority, and some have learned not to try
leading at all. The same can be said of many disempowered groups.
Women who have managed to carve out roles of authority were
likely to be ignored by traditional historical and social science schol-
arship, which focused on the activities of men. In the United States,
for example, women have headed social reform movements dating
back more than 150 years, but only recently, with the emergence of
women's history as an established academic field, have their·accom-
plishments been chronicled. Perhaps recognizing the category of
leadership without authority will increase our awareness of women's
                           Creative Deviance on the Frontline    I 185

leadership at the same time that we learn to authorize women to
public positions from which to lead with formal authority.
   The question, however, remains, "Can someone exercise leader-
ship from the foot of the table, or even from outside the family-
without any authority, formal or informal?" I think the answer is
yes, and in several ways. Some people, like Gandhi, lead societies
without holding formal office of any kind. More frequently, people
have a base of formal authority within their own subgroup, like Lech
Walesa as head of Solidarity in Communist Poland, Martin Luther
King Jr. as founder of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference,
or Margaret Sanger as head of what became Planned Parenthood. In
addition, they have a wide network of informal authority in the
community at large, as did Gandhi. But these people lead not only
within the boundaries of the communities that authorize them, for-
mally and informally, but also across those boundaries, reaching to
communities where their words and actions have influence despite
having no authorization. In segments of the larger community that
these leaders influence, they lack both kinds of authority. In a sense,
they lead across two boundaries: the boundary of their formal or-
ganization, if they have one, and the boundary defined by the wider
network of people with whom they have gained informal authority
(trust, respect, moral persuasion).
   In fact, many people daily go beyond both their job description
and the informal expectations they carry within their organization
and do what they are not authorized to do. At a minimum, these
people exercise leadership momentarily by impressing upon a group,
sometimes by powerfully articulating an idea that strikes a resonant
chord, the need to pay attention to a missing point of view. A staff
assistant will speak up at a meeting even though she has no authority
to do so. Or someone will run an unauthorized experiment and later
announce the results. Or in the early hours of a disaster, some people
will step forward and mobilize others to face and respond to the
crisis. On a public level, a Rachel Carson will publish a Silent Spring.
   In U.S. history, furthermore, many people have engaged in various
forms of civil disobedience to mobilize adaptive work among com-
munities that were indifferent or hostile. Those they led across for-
mal and informal boundaries gave them no authority whatsoever,
certainly not in the early stages of their efforts. The people they led
186 /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

learned and changed their ways grudgingly. In the past two centuries
Samuel Adams, Henry David Thoreau, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, and
Susan B. Anthony are but a few.
   At an extreme, war has been used as a means to mobilize adaptive
work. When Abraham Lincoln went to war with the South, he
clearly had no authority, formal or informal, in the eyes of seceding
Southerners. Indeed, in ten states he won no popular votes in 1860
because he was not even put on the ballot. He led across the newly
formed boundary, challenging Southerners to solve rather than flee
from the problems of reconciling differences within a union that their
recent forebears had played dominant roles in producing. 3
   Thus, when we speak of leadership without authority, we are
referring to a very large set of stances, from the person operating
from the margins of society even to the senior authority figure who
leads beyond his pale of authority, challenging either his own con-
stituents' expectations or engaging people across the boundary of his
organization who would ordinarily or preferably pay him no mind.
   Over time, a person who begins without authority or who leads
beyond whatever authority she has may have to construct,
strengthen, and sometimes broaden her base of informal authority
in order to get more leverage. She may find that an initial, rebellious
leadership action puts her in an informal authority position that
requires trust, respect, and moral force in order to sustain progress.
Such were the beginnings of King, Gandhi, and Sanger. An emerging
leader may need a base from which to speak to hard issues without
being ignored or cast out altogether. Furthermore, to involve the
relevant factions in the community, she may need people across
boundaries to believe that she represents something significant, that
she embodies a perspective that merits attention. When that happens,
she has to respect both the resources and constraints that come with
authority, formally from her own group, and informally from be-
yond. Just as leading with authority requires protecting voices of
dissent, a leader without authority will have to "take counsel" from
her adversaries, incorporating in her strategy whatever wisdom of
theirs connects to her central thesis. 4
   As she seeks informal authority from those across organizational
or factional boundaries, she has to place her cause in the context of
the values of her opposition. In addition, she may have to learn from
                           Creative Deviance on the Frontline /   187

her antagonists in order to correct for the possible narrowness of her
own views. She is not just teaching; she is being taught. Thus, King,
Stanton, Anthony, Gandhi, and Sanger placed and came to under-
stand their struggles in the context of the day's dominant values and
concerns. King spoke of equality and freedom, and learned the work-
ings of the legal, political, and economic systems controlled by white
society in building a national movement to combat racism. Stanton
and Anthony both invoked the Declaration of Independence in de-
manding equal rights for women, and assimilated the militance,
defiance, and toughness of male society in building a tradition for
women to defend themselves against domination. Gandhi spoke of
liberty and self-determination, and discovered techniques for invok-
ing the force and brutality of the British Army to weaken Britain's
stronghold on India. Sanger put birth control in the setting of pov-
erty, unchecked population growth, and family health, and absorbed
politics, contraceptive medicine, and law in advancing what seemed
to her obvious birth-control rights requiring no legal or medical
justification.
   Just as Parsons, Ruckelshaus, and Lyndon Johnson had to
strengthen bonds of trust to bolster their formal authority and hold
people's attention, people who begin without any authority often
have to place their contributions within an on-going tradition or
organization that provides a vessel of trust to hold the distress they
generate. Since they have less leverage to shape the holding environ-
ment, they must make use of the vessel that is there.

            The Benefits of Leading Without Authority
Leadership, as used here, means engaging people to make progress
on the adaptive problems they face. Because making progress on
adaptive problems requires learning, the task of leadership consists
of choreographing and directing learning processes in an organiza-
tion or community. Progress often demands new ideas and innova-
tion. As well, it often demands changes in people's attitudes and
behaviors. Adaptive work consists of the process of discovering and
making those changes. Leadership, with or without authority, re-
quires an educative strategy. 5
   Senior authority generally includes the power to manage the hold-
188   /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

ing environment, direct attention, gather and influence the flow of
information, frame the terms of debate, distribute responsibility,
regulate conflict and distress, and structure decision processes. Yet
the constraints of authority suggest that there may also be advan-
tages to leading without it. First, the absence of authority enables
one to deviate from the norms of authoritative decisionmaking.
Instead of providing answers that soothe, one can more readily raise
questions that disturb. One does not have to keep the ship on an
even keel. One has more latitude for creative deviance. Second,
leading without or beyond one's authority permits focusing hard on
a single issue. One does not have to contend so fully with meeting
the multiple expectations of multiple constituencies and providing
the holding environment for everybody. One can have an issue focus.
Third, operating with little or no authority places one closer to the
detailed experiences of some of the stakeholders in the situation. One
may lose the larger perspective but gain the fine grain of people's
hopes, pains, values, habits, and history. One has frontline informa-
tion.
   For example, in terms of latitude, King had the leeway to drama-
tize issues in ways that Johnson could not. King could stage demon-
strations or disobey local law as a means of bringing the brutality
of racism into people's living rooms. Imagine for a moment that
Johnson had gone to Selma to march instead of King. It is doubtful
that the police would have been so brutal with the President at the
head of the line. Most likely, the local and state police would have
"loved Johnson to defeat" in the same way that the more strategi-
cally minded police in Albany, Georgia, had "loved King to defeat"
during his demonstrations there in late 1961. In the same vein, King
also had the latitude to use himself as an embodiment of the issue.
By going to jail, he used his own person to dramatize racist suppres-
sion. By writing his "Letter from Birmingham Jail," he became a
living example of the inequities he battled. 6 Imprisonment served as
another metaphor and opportunity to address the nation's conflict
in values.
   In terms of issue focus, Johnson had to concern himself with being
"the President of all the people." Leading from authority, he could
not afford to embody a single issue without jeopardizing that author-
ity and his capacity to lead on many others. He had to make trade-
                           Creative Deviance on the Frontline I 189

offs between issues, dilute issues, and sometimes accept the lowest
common denominator. In contrast, King could focus on civil rights.
Indeed, as long as he maintained that focus, he could reach out to a
large and varied constituency of Americans, black and white, with
diverse views on many other isslLes. For example, King did not have
to risk splitting his supporters by antagonizing those who felt
strongly for or against communism. When President Kennedy and
Attorney General Robert Kennedy, pressed by J. Edgar Hoover, told
King to distance himself from his closest associates, who were leftists,
King went far to comply.7 This went quite against his own values,
but communism was not his issue. Yet King was not as single-minded
in maintaining his focus as he might have been. Having gained
widespread moral authority, he felt compelled to speak out on the
Vietnam War. Whether this helped his cause is a question beyond
our scope, but one has to consider the possibility that his mantle of
informal authority became, in part, a constraint on his ability to
focus on the single issue of civil rights.
   In terms of frontline information, King knew intimately the habits
and attitudes of his community in ways that Johnson could only
imagine at a distance. He knew the humiliation, the fear, the rage,
and the fatigue. He knew what moved people and who moved
people. To be sure, Johnson had his own advantages in regard to
information, but these complemented King's advantage without su-
perseding it.
   The following three cases of leadership illustrate these benefits
more fully.


                    Mohandas K. Gandhi in India
King took his lessons from India's Gandhi, who in turn took his
lessons from the Bhagavad Gita, Jesus, Thoreau, and Tolstoy, to
name a few. 8 Gandhi developed and refined the technique of nonvio-
lent civil disobedience to illustrate to the British public the moral
contradictions of its colonial policies. Massive demonstrations, bru-
tal beatings, nationwide strikes, hunger fasts', and years in jail all
were meant to dramatize to the British the gap between their es-
poused values-justice and self-determination-and their behavior-
subjugation. Gandhi tried to force attention upon that to which very
190   /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

few in Britain wanted to pay attention. He identified the adaptive
challenge and he used various methods of creative deviance to get
people to face it.
   Gandhi gained informal authority from much of the Indian popu-
lation and led India using the resources of that informal authority.
At the same time, he also generated adaptive work among the British
over whom he did not exercise even the least informal authority. The
British did not ask him to represent their internal contradictions. If
he later gained moral authority in some of their eyes, that was an
outcome of his activism, not a precondition. For much of his career,
he led the British as a provocateur.
   Lacking authority with the British, Gandhi used himself to drama-
tize the issues. He embodied the British values he demanded the
British live by. When he fasted for justice, people began to pay
attention, not because another person was about to die of starvation
but because Gandhi practiced what he preached. If he and his con-
stituents were ready to make a personal sacrifice for the values that
those in Britain held dear, then perhaps the cotton mill workers in
Lancashire, England, would do so as well. 9
   Fundamentally, Gandhi used a strategy to provoke learning tar-
geted at the values, attitudes, and habits of his adversary. He did this
as well with the Indian people. India had its own large measure of
adaptive work to do, although not all of his collaborators recognized
that the problems facing the two nations were nontechnical. Many
"Home Rule" activists in Indian politics considered colonialism a
Type I problem-clearly defined with a clear-cut solution. The British
should leave, period, end of story. Gandhi saw beneath the surface
of the problem. Colonialism was a way of life not only to Britain
but to India. Breaking up that way of life would require enormous
adaptive work. The British could just leave India, as eventually they
did, but getting them ready to leave and getting India ready to rule
herself were adaptive challenges of the first magnitude. Britain would
have to face the loss of empire and wealth, requiring the reconstruc-
tion of identity based on other values, the reconstruction of economy
based on other means. India would have to construct a national
identity (Hindu or Muslim or both), a national government (demo-
cratic or socialist), and an effective economy (industrial or agricul-
tural, protectionist or open, planned or market-driven). There was
                           Creative Deviance on the Frontline I 191

nothing clear-cut about the learning required by the parties with a
stake in this predicament. 10
   It took Gandhi a long lifetime, more than fifty adult years, to
mobilize action and opinion in Britain, India, and South Africa.
During all those years, he held no formal authority. Indeed, he
shunned taking office in either the dominant political party, the
Congress Party, or the new government itself when it finally formed
in 1947. He thought he had more latitude for action without formal
authority. He could challenge the people in ways that might be
difficult for an official whose primary concerns must turn to holding
the party and government together, to seeking an equilibrium.
   Yet Gandhi gained extraordinary informal authority. People
throughout India looked to him with great awe, trust, fear, and
occasional dread. They called him Mahatma-The Great One. More
than the formal authorities in India, Gandhi operated at the focal
point of the nation's attention. His fasting mattered because, over
the course of thirty years he had become the singular embodiment
of the nation's hopes and pains. Indians and non-Indians granted
him moral authority, not only because he used his own person to
represent the issues but because he had the strategic ability to drama-
tize over and over again that the aspirations of his people were
consonant with the moral underpinnings of the West.
   He used this informal authority with consummate skill. With it,
he regulated the levels of social disequilibrium generated by the
political movement for independence. He would call for a demon-
stration and then quell it when he thought that the tensions un-
leashed were becoming destructive. For example, in 1921, on the eve
of his first effort at mass civil disobedience-which he limited to one
city instead of extending it nationwide, as his political colleagues
demanded-an Indian mob murdered a group of British policemen.
In response, Gandhi called the whole strike off. To him, the outbreak
was symptomatic of public unreadiness for a nonviolent campaign,
and more violence would impede progress. 11 The special personalized
relationship that he developed with the general public gave him the
power to frame and focus attention on the issues, move people to
action, and slow them down. 12 It also gave him dominant influence
with the senior Indian politicians in the movement for independence,
who could not help but respond to Gandhi's widespread reputation.
192   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

He could orchestrate and address conflict, not only between the
Indians and the British but among the factions within India as
well-militant and nonviolent, Muslim and Hindu. To be sure, the
formal authority of the British gave them a great deal more power
to regulate disequilibrium. Within wide limits, they controlled how
the system responded: with carrots, sticks, and structure; they had
been doing so for centuries. But Gandhi's informal authority gave
him pivotal control over how the system would be challenged, and
how fast and hard.
   Gandhi did not always have informal authority even with his own
people. In various campaigns for justice, both in India and in his
earlier years in South Africa, Gandhi was a nobody speaking up and
raising hard questions and often failing. His lack of authority gave
him more room to experiment with deviating from the norms. He
gained informal authority only over time as his strategy, through trial
and error, began to work. As he made small gains, he accrued
respect, trust, and attention, which became tools to apply to the next
campaign. Informal authority came as a useful by-product of his
leadership strategy, waxing and waning with tactical gains and
losses, but mostly rising over time and providing him with resources
for broader and more sustained leadership activity.
   When Gandhi returned to India on January 9, 1915, after twenty
years of struggle in South Africa, he returned triumphant after his
publicized and successful use of nonviolent civil disobedience to
change repressive laws against South Africans of Indian decent. But
rather than parlay his success in South Africa in exchange for author-
ity within the indigenous political structures emerging in India,
Gandhi, on the strong recommendation of his mentor, Professor
Gokhale, set out to rediscover India at the grassroots, the India of
villages. Why? By staying close to the frontline of life in India,
Gandhi learned about the nature and enormity of the work facing
his country. He learned about the values of his people, the economic
arrangements, the ingrained habits of servitude and poverty, the
brutal prejudices among them, the ignorance, and the pain. 13
   Formal authorities, in contrast, operate at a distance from the
frontline. Although having their own special vantage point with
access across a whole region of organization, community, or social
system, authority figures are beholden to their subordinates for in-
                           Creative Deviance on the Frontline   /   193

formation. The advantage of formal positions of authority is
breadth. The disadvantage is distance from raw and relevant detail. 14
   The American presidency illustrates this information dilemma. As
Richard Neustadt suggests, "It is not information of a general sort
that helps a President ... not summaries, not surveys, not the bland
amalgams. Rather it is the odds and ends of tangible detail that,
pieced together in his mind, illuminate the underside of issues put
before him ... To help himself, he must reach out as widely as he
can for every scrap of fact, opinion, gossip, bearing on his interests
and relationships as President. He must become his own director of
his own central intelligence." 15
   Gandhi understood that adaptive work required an intimate un-
derstanding of Indian society-of the strengths upon which a future
self-reliant India could be built, and the weaknesses that hampered
change. For example, Gandhi's nonviolence, fundamentally an In-
dian idea, struck a responsive chord throughout the countryside
because the idea itself had its roots there. That Christianity also
espoused some degree of nonviolence enabled Gandhi to connect
Indian and British values and turn one into a means to move the
other. The link gave him a strategy. Yet these shared values also
highlighted weaknesses in India as well. As Gandhi saw it, a political
movement based upon the principle of justice and dignity for all
could not sanction the traditional caste system, or prejudice between
Muslim and Hindu. As his biographer summarized from his first
speeches to the Indian National Congress: "The British might go,
but would that help the fifty to sixty million outcast untouchables,
victims of cruel Hindu discrimination? Independence must mean
more than Indian office-holders in the places and palaces of British
office-holders. "16 For Gandhi to challenge these ways of life de-
manded knowing them deeply, by experience, by operating close to
the frontline, where the stakeholders of India lived. Gandhi could
speak to people, to their hopes, fears, weaknesses, and needs because
he spent time knowing them. He could touch and inspire people
because they touched and inspired him.
   Had Gandhi taken political office, even at the end of his career,
he might have traded away these benefits. As President or Prime
Minister of India, two offices easily within reach, Gandhi would have
taken up the center. At the center, he would then have become the
194   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

repository of all the conflicting strains within the country expecting
him to meet their needs and reduce distress. Inevitably, he would
have felt the constraints of a role that would have compelled him to
become a sort of "vector sum" of conflicting forces walking a middle
path. Outside the center, Gandhi had the freedom to present a
focused and coherent message, and to embody it. He had only to
meet the_ expectations of those who, believing in him already, pro-
vided a base for his challenge to the nation and to Britain.

               Margaret Sanger in the United States
Perhaps more than anyone else in this century, Margaret Sanger
mobilized people in the United States and abroad to face the rela-
tionship between poverty, population, the status of women, and the
need for women to have the freedom to plan and limit the size of
their families. 17 Starting her career as a nurse at the turn of the
twentieth century, Sanger saw firsthand the plight of women on New
York's Lower East Side as they struggled with more children than
they could financially or emotionally care for, exhausted themselves,
endangered their lives having illegal abortions, or died in childbirth.
She had seen her own overworked mother dying young while tending
to eleven children. In her day, many women in America were desper-
ate for a safe means of contraception, yet birth control of any sort
was illegal. Indeed, even writing about birth control fell under state
and federal laws against obscenity.
   As Sanger told the story, her awakening came while caring for a
young Jewish immigrant named Sadie Sachs in her Lower East Side
tenement. Mrs. Sachs was suffering from infection after a self-
induced abortion, and her doctor had responded to her plea for
reliable contraception by advising her to tell her husband, Jake, "to
sleep on the roof." Sanger told Mrs. Sachs about condoms and coitus
interruptus, since these were the commonplace contraceptives of the
day, though Sanger found them unacceptable because they ceded the
power of birth control to men. When she returned three months later
to find Mrs. Sachs dying of widespread infection, she resolved to
leave "the palliative career of nursing in pursuit of fundamental
social change." 18
   She began her public career in 1910 giving speeches in small
                           Creative Deviance on the Frontline   /   195

socialist circles about the lives of poor immigrant women and writing
columns on sex -education and health for The Call, the popular
socialist daily. In 1914 she started her own magazine provocatively
called The Woman Rebel, in which she continued to challenge Vic-
torian prohibitions against discussing the role of women and the use
of contraceptive methods under a woman's control. In August 1914,
after but a handful of issues of the Rebel, she was arrested for
sending "indecent" materials through the mail. Rather than prepare
for trial, however, she wrote Family Limitation, a pamphlet that
explained in a plain and simple way the common forms of contra-
ception. Although millions of Americans were already using these
methods in secret, the taboo against discussing them kept women in
a state of enforced ignorance about proper use. After preparing the
pamphlet for publication, Sanger fled the country to Europe. From
aboard ship, she cabled her New Jersey printer to release 100,000
copies of the pamphlet, which had been readied for distribution.
   While she was a fugitive abroad, the police arrested Sanger's hus-
band in their New York apartment for handing out a copy of Family
Limitation. The three Sanger children were taken care of by friends
and relatives while he spent thirty days in prison. The judged ruled:
"Your crime is not only a violation of the laws of man, but of the
law of God as well, in your scheme to prevent motherhood. Too
many persons have the idea that it is wrong to have children. Some
women are so selfish that they do not want to be bothered with them.
If some persons would go around and urge Christian women to bear
children, instead of wasting their time on woman suffrage, this city
and society would be better off."19 When Sanger heard of her hus-
band's fate, she came home to stand trial.
   The escape to Europe, the pamphlet, her husband's imprisonment,
and the court's clear verdict all served to bring public attention for
the first time to the issue of birth control. Suddenly, reputable news-
papers and magazines were writing stories on the subject. In 1914
The New York Times carried only three articles about birth control,
in 1915 it carried fourteen, and in the following two years, ninety.
As the issue began to generate a much wider base of support, Sanger
shed her radical rhetoric and began to frame the debate in ways far
more understandable to a broader audience. She sought broad infor-
mal authority. She made an absolute distinction between contracep-
196   /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

tion and abortion, advocating only the former, and she separated
herself from a host of other issues about which she had an interest,
from pacifism in the face of World War I to the broad socialist
agenda. As she now more tamely put it, giving women control over
their own fertility held "the key to personal fulfillment through
marriage, motherhood, and independent self-realization ... Women
would make themselves the instruments of social regeneration . . .
They would reconstitute the family, that fundamental unit of collec-
tive life, in a manner consistent with the rigor and discipline the
modern world demanded in all dimensions of human activity. "20 This
was not, however, a cynical strategy; Sanger's own views grew as she
began to engage other points of view seriously and, in turn, was
taken seriously herself. Apparently, she learned from engaging a
wider audience. And she made the strategic decision to devote her
efforts singularly to birth control. Operating without authority, she
could afford to focus.
   By the time of her trial in February 1916, public opinion had
begun to shift. Sanger, wearing lace, posed for photographs with her
two sons to offset her image as a radical; and an orchestrated cam-
paign of supportive letters swamped the desks of judges and legisla-
tors. Indeed, a distinguished list of British intellectuals whom Sanger
had befriended during her fugitive year, including the already famous
H.G. Wells, wrote to President Woodrow Wilson. The public mood
probably had its effect, for the charges were dropped. Sanger's vic-
tory led to publicity and speechmaking across the country.
   Immediately, she started the nation's first birth control clinic in a
storefront tenement in Brooklyn, modeled after the clinic system she
had seen in Holland. She evidently wanted to create an example for
America. Unable to secure a physician as medical director, she asked
her sister, Ethel Byrne, a registered nurse, to run the clinic. But within
weeks they were both arrested and put in jail.
   Sanger seized the opportunities of the new crisis. Ethel went on a
hunger strike, which generated more useful publicity and attracted
the governor's attention. And after serving their sentences, Sanger
appealed their convictions in the hope of obtaining a court ruling
that would affirm at least the right of physicians to prescribe con-
traception in case of medical need. Doctors might then define the
patient's need quite broadly as a matter of their own professional
                            Creative Deviance on the Frontline   I   197

judgment. Sanger and her lawyer saw this as the only potential gap
in the law that might enable them to establish birth control clinics
legally across the country. On January 8, 1918, they got what they
needed. The New York State Court of Appeals upheld Sanger's
conviction under the state's obscenity law prohibiting lay men and
women from distributing contraceptive information, but it offered
an interpretation that granted specific license to physicians to pre-
scribe contraceptive devices.
   Seeking a partnership with the male medical profession, however,
seemed a big mistake to some of Sanger's activist colleagues. The
American Medical Association was a staunch supporter of the laws
that made discussions about contraception illegal. Doctors, by and
large, had been an impediment. Sanger and other experienced
women probably knew more about techniques of birth control than
American physicians at that time. Yet to Sanger, drawing in the
medical profession and letting them play the expert role was a
necessary tactical concession to the authority structure of the society.
It enabled the legal establishment of clinics without first having to
change any laws. Furthermore, Sanger agreed with some of the key
orienting values of the medical profession. She wanted to place birth
control on as scientific a footing as possible, while promoting re-
search into new methods that might prove safer, more reliable, and
more readily accessible.
   From then on, enlisting the support of physicians would be central
to her efforts. In 1921, as she established her national organization
of family planning clinics, which later became the International
Planned Parenthood Federation, she insisted that physicians be hired
as medical directors for the clinics. Yet even her concessions to the
medical profession and the legal victory that made it possible for
doctors to get involved did not make it easy to gain their official
support. Sanger had to find ways to engage the attention of the
profession. The chairman of the American Gynecological Society, Dr.
Robert Latou Dickenson, had decried Sanger's efforts to start birth
control clinics. But when Sanger hired her first physician in 1923,
Dr. Dorothy Bocker, Dickenson took notice, checked up on the clinic
and its new medical director, and criticized the quality of her research
in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. Sanger had
piqued his professional interest. She then asked Dickenson what it
198 /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

would take to have him work with the clinic in the design of its
research, to which he made several demands, including Bocker's
replacement. Sanger acceded, and though Dickenson did not
officially join Sanger's Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau until
several years later, in 1931, he gradually became a strong supporter
of her work and a major advocate within established medical circles
for birth control use and research. Sanger sought allies among other
physicians as well, and after several years of effort, Dickenson and
these other allies succeeded in getting the American Medical Asso-
ciation to reverse itself and endorse contraception. In 1937 it set a
new standard for itself: "Voluntary family limitation is dependent
largely on the judgment and wishes of individual patients. "21
   Through the decades of the twenties, thirties, forties, and much of
the fifties, Sanger doggedly reached out to every constituency that
might count-mobilizing women around the world and men with
authority not only in the medical sciences but in politics, business,
and labor. By writing, traveling, and speaking virtually nonstop at a
frenzied pace for years at a time, she educated, provoked, and or-
ganized women and men to see the causal connections between
poverty, population growth, the health of families, and a woman's
status and ability to determine the size of her family. She demanded
public candor about an aspect of life heretofore unspeakable yet
undeniably critical to our existence.
   Sanger's life had been full of both despair and achievement. For
years at a time, she felt stymied. The Great Depression and World
War II put many of her efforts on hold. Even Roosevelt's experimen-
tal approach to the New Deal had little room for this issue. He could
not afford to offend the Catholic Church. As well, some reputable
economists attributed the Depression to the steady decline in popu-
lation, and urged against birth control. Yet she did not stop. Sanger
used these years to build an international network and to solidify
her American organization. Finally, in the late 1950s, for reasons
that included a growing appreciation of the link between population
and poverty, and the development of the birth control pill-funded
with support that Sanger arranged-family planning became an ac-
cepted idea. Sanger lived just long enough to see the Supreme Court
guarantee protection for the private use of contraceptives in the 1965
case of Griswold v. Connecticut.
                            Creative Deviance on the Frontline   I 199

   Margaret Sanger identified an adaptive challenge-an internal
contradiction in America. Millions of people were using birth control
by the turn of the century, yet the laws prohibited its discussion,
research, and prescription. A nation that valued self-reliance and
autonomy rendered half of its population dependent and out of
control. A nation in which women were entering the work force by
the millions refused to face the necessary trade-offs and adjustments
in family size. A nation committed to reducing domestic and inter-
national poverty did nothing to limit population growth. By expos-
ing these internal contradictions between values and behavior,
Sanger gained leverage over people's attention and sentiments.
   Over decades Sanger built a wide network of informal authority
relationships with feminists and sympathizers around the world. She
used this authority to set strategy, direct attention, frame the issues,
and orchestrate conflict within the movement. But most of the people
she led gave her no informal authority whatsoever. To them, she was
a persistent nuisance. Indeed, social change on an issue so intimate
and basic as the structure of families and women's autonomy over
childbearing challenged nearly everybody in authority: the courts,
politicians, businessmen, the Catholic Church, and the medical pro-
fession. Sanger had the latitude to speak to the issues because no one
had asked her to. Asking generates expectations, and expectations
create limits. The courts were constrained by law, politicians by the
sentiments of their constituents, businessmen by their associates and
customers, Catholic officials by Rome, and doctors by their guild.
Sanger was not constrained. She had the latitude to break and discuss
taboos.
   Yet to change primary norms and rules, Sanger had to broaden
her base of support and find allies among these authorities. She could
not afford to isolate herself on the point, to let the conflict be cast
as if it were essentially a dispute between a monolithic structure and
a few rebellious women. Mobilizing the many divisions of society
for change meant kindling internal political tensions within each one.
Each would then, on its own, generate new ideas and policies in its
natural attempt to rectify internal dissonance. By fostering allies
within each segment of society, the latent conflict between opposing
factions in each segment would come alive. Debate would be fos-
tered. The issue would ripen. Dickenson and his allies would become
200   /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

advocates persuading other doctors; religious authorities would pro-
voke other religious authorities; business allies would engage other
businessmen; and political allies would deal with other politicians.
   In essence, Sanger used an educative strategy-to move both elites
and public opinion. Thus, establishing a nationwide network of
clinics not only provided medical and educational services to those
in need, it also touched the general public. In her view, efforts to
change laws, largely futile in themselves, only made sense if they
provoked public engagement with the issues. Changing laws was an
outcome of social learning. When she wrote, went to jail, lobbied in
Congress, or traveled to meet Gandhi, Sanger aimed to stimulate
public debate. 22 By creative deviance, she prodded those in authority
to continue the debate. And like Gandhi and King, she became expert
at using the press. She always traveled with her typewriter.
   Sanger focused on a single issue. She gained informal authority
because she knew one issue totally and had the discipline to stay
away from distracting arguments about the major problems of the
day, including war, peace, and communism. Though she cared deeply
and had strong opinions about them, she stayed the course, speaking
to the other problems only as they might connect to hers. In that
way, she provided a clear context for her actions and became increas-
ingly understandable to a wider group of people. Indeed, she became
perhaps too adept at framing the issue of birth control in light of the
concerns and values of whatever audience she happened to be reach-
ing. In speaking to social policymakers, she talked about the allevia-
tion of poverty; with conservative men and women, she focused on
the need to strengthen overburdened families by giving them the
resources to plan their families according to their capacities; with
progressive women, she spoke openly about the satisfaction to be
had from taking control over their own bodies; but with many
intellectuals who, pre-Hitler, saw eugenics as a means to improve the
human race, she spoke of the need for birth control among the poor
and unfit, even while disavowing racism.
   Despite her celebrity status and globe-trotting efforts, Sanger op-
erated at the frontline. From the start as a nurse, through years
running the Birth Control Clinical Research Bureau in Manhattan-
the prototypic family planning clinic-until old age when she received
and responded to a vast number of letters from women in all walks
                           Creative Deviance on the Frontline / 201

of life, Sanger touched intimately the life experiences of women. She
knew them, worked with them, and never forgot that they were her
primary constituency.


                    Two Lieutenants in Vietnam
Lack of authority may provide special assets and opportunities for
leadership, but only for those who recognize and seize them. The
following two stories illustrate a kind of challenge that many of us
face every day in our organizations: confronting customary habits
and procedures that obstruct adaptive work. 23
   As the war in Vietnam reached its peak, bombing missions over
North Vietnam became routine. Yet Air Force Lieutenant Chuck
Adams, a bomber pilot, began to notice a strange pattern of lost
planes. Every so often a bomber would blow up in the sky while still
high above the reach of antiaircraft fire. Adams deduced the possible
cause. Since no high-altitude losses of aircraft had taken place in the
two years preceding the introduction of a new type of bomb designed
to explode at a preprogrammed altitude, Adams reasoned that the
bombs were faulty. He discussed this theory with his ordinance
officer and fellow pilots. The ordinance officer brushed the theory
aside, but the pilots flying the planes thought it made some sense-at
least enough sense to call a halt to using the new bombs until an
investigation could be conducted. They took their case to the com-
manding officer, who first asked the ordinance specialist for his view.
Finding no authoritative backing for the theory, the commander
dismissed the pilots' case and ordered them to fly.
   Adams and his fellow pilots were facing what subordinates in
tightly managed organizations often face: resistance from authority,
for understandable reasons. All the way up the chain of command,
people with varying degrees of authority were expected to meet a set
of performance expectations, on schedule. Adams's commanding
officer was no different. Were he to deviate from the bombing plan
based on the hunch of his pilots and without the support of his
weapons expert, he would have subjected himself to ridicule from
above. He had a mission to accomplish and a schedule to keep in
fighting a difficult adversary, and changing or delaying that mission
would not be taken lightly.
202   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

   Adams understood that his commanding officer was constrained
by expectations that accompanied his office. Adams himself had to
address conflicting expectations associated with his own position of
authority.24 His flight crew looked to him to protect them from
unnecessary danger. Were Adams to follow orders, he would be
risking the lives of his men for reasons that would be hard to justify,
given his hunch. That went against the grain of the informal author-
ity his crew gave him. If Adams didn't do something, given their
earnest suspicions of danger, he would diminish his crew's trust just
as the commanding officer had diminished his trust.
   Yet if Adams failed to follow orders, he would jeopardize his
formal authority as a military officer-his job and chances for pro-
motion. Should he buckle under, or commit insubordination based
on a hunch? Adams felt stuck in the middle between his superior
officer and his men, and he could find no middle option. As he saw
it, the choice was clear: follow or disobey. He saw no room for
deviance. He saw no options for leadership. All Adams had was the
vantage point of someone at the frontline seeing things more sharply
than those farther away, and he did not think that was enough.
   When told to fly, he flew, and prayed. Adams blamed the com-
manding officer for making him fly, which reduced the loss of his
crew's informal authorization. And they were lucky. But another
plane, not so lucky, blew up within months. Only then did the
commanding officer order a halt to the use of the new bombs,
pending an investigation back in California at the site of the produc-
tion plant. As it turns out, the bombs were indeed defective.
   Reviewing the situation twenty years later, Adams, now a colonel,
could see in retrospect a whole range of options for leadership in
between obedience and insubordination. He might have pushed his
group of fellow pilots and their crews for ideas on how to make the
case against the faulty bombs. They might have found a way to push
their commander, respectfully but forcefully, to pay closer attention
to the evidence behind their hunch. For example, after reassuring the
commander that ultimately they would obey his orders, they might
have told him that they were not inclined to leave his office until
they felt sure that he had fully weighed the evidence against the
suspected triggering mechanism. They might have asked him to in-
vestigate up the chain of command whether any other hunches of
                             Creative Deviance on the Frontline     I 203

 this sort had been filing in. With more humor, they might have
 wheeled a bomb into his office to dramatize the issue. They also
might have asked him to find out whether the mission plan for that
week was critical: Was there room for postponement until more
reliable bombs could be had? How long would that take? Was there
 anything they could do to speed up bringing in trustworthy bombs?
    In retrospect, it is hard to know if such a conversation would have
gone anywhere. But if Adams had orchestrated a work process
 among his fellows and with his senior, they might have discovered a
way out of the dilemma. Adams, however, did not see the option of
organizing the work, even when his own life was at stake. He did
not exercise leadership because he saw no middle way at the time to
challenge authority, respectfully.
    Consider another soldier in Vietnam. Army lieutenant John
Richards found himself charged in the closing days of the war with
dangerous daily assignments to search out and destroy the enemy.
Yet he and his platoon were fighting at a time when most American
troops had already been withdrawn and the soldiers on the ground
could see that the war, as a strategy of foreign policy, had been lost.
   To Richards, this was an insane period of months. Following
orders meant likely death for some of his men, for no apparent
reason. Unlike some other lieutenants who, on patrol surrounding
American bases, could fight for the -purpose of protecting other
soldiers, Richards could find little justification for risking the lives of
his men. The challenge now in the face of strategic defeat was to cut
American losses.
   Richards thus faced sharply conflicting expectations. His formal
authorization from his commanding officers required him to con-
tinue his dangerous assignments. His informal authorization from
his men required him to protect them from unnecessary risk.
   Richards weighed the problem and discussed it openly with his
troops. One option was to disobey orders. They knew they could do
so in subtle ways without incurring the risk of court martial. But for
several soldiers, including Richards, disobeying orders was not an
acceptable option. Military organizations required discipline, and
respect for the chain of command was crucial to the long-term
integrity of the institution to which Richards and others were com-
mitted. A soldier joined the army knowing that the whole was greater
204   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

than the parts and that individual sacrifices of the highest order
would be required, not only by military necessity but also by incom-
petence and mistake. However, some men, primarily draftees, had
no interest in risking their lives for the sake of the institution and its
code.
   Richards, through hard and impassioned discussion with his men,
found a way to accommodate both obedience and insubordination,
to lead beyond his formal authority. He allowed his platoon to break
into two groups, one that felt committed to the military and honored
its norms, and one that did not. The committed group, headed by
Richards, continued to fight and to risk their lives. The uncommitted
group, with the help of those fighting, stayed out of combat as best
they could. Each group respected the choice of the other. And most
of them came home.
   Adams and Richards shared somewhat similar situations. The two
lieutenants had both formal and informal authority, and in both
cases the authorizations were partially in conflict. The sources of
their formal authority-the chain of command-wanted the mission
accomplished. The sources of their informal authority-the bomber
crew and the infantry soldiers-wanted protection from going out
on a flawed assignment. In both cases, the lieutenants had frontline
information that called the assignment into question. The challenge
they identified required a change in norms and procedures.
   However, the situations were structurally different. Adams would
have had to exercise leadership up the chain of command, whereas
Richards out in the field could shield his platoon from above, al-
though at some risk. Perhaps this made it less difficult for Richards
to see the possibility of leadership beyond his authority. Adams
followed orders because he could not envision a way to challenge
senior authority with both strength and respect. The two seemed
mutually exclusive. At the time, he neither saw the leadership option
nor mobilized his fellows to invent one. In contrast, Richards saw
the possibility. By working the toughest of issues with his platoon
and valuing conflicting perspectives within it, he generated a solution
that honored institutional loyalty· and, at the same time, individual
differences. Adams and Richards both had frontline information and
a clear issue. The difference between them lay in seeing and seizing
the opportunity for creative deviance.
                           Creative Deviance on the Frontline   /   205


      Establishing the Norm of Leadership Without Authority
Over the span of a career, Gandhi and Sanger gained informal
authority, but both spent many years leading without it, mobilizing
audiences who had no interest in paying attention to them. Indeed,
large segments of the audiences they wished to engage were antago-
nistic. When they did gain informal authority from some of these
audiences, it was not a precondition for leading but a product of
leading. Though providing tools, the authority gained also acted as
a constraint. In turn, the constraints served both as a limit and as a
prod toward creativity. As they became prominent sources of mean-
ing within their societies, Gandhi and Sanger began to carry the
overlapping but conflicting expectations of mixed constituencies,
pressuring them toward compromise and innovation. Gandhi inno-
vated the strategy of nonviolent civil disobedience to speak to
the British with moral authority. Sanger created a system of medi-
cally staffed clinics that would serve women while speaking to the
medical profession. Both created authority for themselves starting
with none.
   The Vietnam officers Adams and Richards faced specific adaptive
problems at one moment in time rather than the ongoing challenge
of social adaptation. Yet, as with Gandhi and Sanger, the opportu-
nity for leadership required going beyond their authority-particu-
larly, their formal authority. In doing so, Richards faced grave risks,
not only to his career but also to his platoon. Competing expecta-
tions drove him toward innovation. But his innovation might have
been wrong; it might have resulted in increases rather than decreases
in loss of men. He had to bear that uncertainty without the support
of his superiors.
   Distinguishing leadership and authority is more than an analytic
and strategic tool. It is also a means to describe the personal expe-
rience of leading. As we often experience it in real-time, leadership
means taking responsibility for hard problems beyond anyone's ex-
pectations. Ironically, many people wait until they gain authority,
formal or informal, to begin leading. They see authority as a prereq-
uisite. Yet those who do lead usually feel that they are taking action
beyond whatever authority they have. How did leadership feel to
Gandhi, Sanger, and Richards, even after gaining informal authority
206   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY


from certain constituents-Indian nationalists, anticolonial sympa-
thizers, feminists, or members of the platoon? I suspect that they
continued to experience leadership as an activity performed without
authority, beyond expectations. They were not waiting for the
coach's call.
                                  9
       Modulating the Provocation


The principles of leadership that we have discussed-identifying the
adaptive challenge, keeping distress within a productive range, di-
recting attention to ripening issues and not diversions, giving the
work back to the people, and protecting voices of leadership in the
community-apply to leaders with or without authority. However,
because the benefits and constraints differ, those who lead without
authority must adopt strategies and tactics that are at once more
bold and subtle.
   First, without authority, one has very little control over the holding
environment. One can shape the stimulus, but one cannot manage
the response: one cannot institute an organizing structure, pick a
temporizing side issue, secure a new norm, or provide a calming
presence. A leader without authority can spark debate, but he cannot
orchestrate it. Without authority, a leader must regulate distress by
modulating the provocation.
   Furthermore, without authority one may have a frontline feel for
a single issue in depth, but not as broad a sense of the multiplicity
of challenges facing the community which affect its stance on any
particular issue. This may render the leader without authority less
aware of the other crucial problems confronting the society and the
ripeness of his issue in relation to other pressing issues that may need
to take priority.
   In monitoring levels of distress, any leader has to find indicators
for knowing both when to promote an unripe issue and whether the
                                  207
208   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

stress generated by an intervention falls within the productive range
for that social system at that time. Different organizations and so-
cieties will have different sources and levels of resilience, and each
social system requires serious analysis. But as a general rule, the
leader operating without authority can read the authority figure as
a barometer of issue ripeness and systemic stress because social
systems generally charge authority figures with the particular job of
resolving ripe issues. 1
   Second, in attracting and directing attention to an issue, a leader
without authority has to take into account the special vulnerability
of becoming a lightning rod. Rather than orchestrating the debate
among competing factions, one becomes a faction readily targeted
for attack. Of course, authority figures frequently get attacked as
well, but the resources at their disposal for deflecting attention and
letting others take the heat are often unavailable to leaders without
authority.
   Third, just as people look to authority to solve problems, leaders
without authority commonly make the mistake of assuming that
only authority figures have the power to affect change. As a result,
there is a strong temptation to identify the authority figure as the
audience for action: "If only we could bring him around, everyone
else would move in the right direction." In general, however, people
in power change their ways when the sources of their authority
change the expectations. Their behavior is an expression of the
community that authorizes them. Thus, a strategy that mobilizes the
stakeholders in the community may be quite a bit more likely to get
work done than the strategy of "challenging authority."


                            Selma, 1965
We have seen the story of Selma from the perspective of President
johnson's leading from high office. Now consider the same story
from the perspective of those who led from the frontline. 2
   The first stirring of the Selma voting rights movement occurred in
1961, when Reverend Fred Reese, a science teacher at Hudson High
School and newly elected president of the local black teachers' or-
ganization, read a statement to a meeting of all local teachers and
administrators urging black teachers to attempt to register to vote
                                     Modulating the Provocation       / 209

in Dallas County. Fearful of recriminations, few black teachers
heeded Reese. However, the seeds had been planted in Selma's black
middle class for a voting rights movement.
   By January 1963, when approximately 125 blacks were registered
to vote in the County, Marie Foster, a dental hygienist, began to feel
that something should be done to correct the low Negro voter reg-
istration rate. Her dental office was just above the small Dallas
County Voters League, the only black civil rights organization in
town (since the NAACP had been banned in Alabama), and she came
into contact daily with Sam and Amelia Boynton, the former NAACP
activists who ran it. With their encouragement, Foster spent nearly
ten years trying to register, always failing "one or more pertinent
questions," as the rejection form said, before gaining the vote. 3
Energized, she wanted to do more. As she describes:

  I was just sitting around my house one day when I became angry
  because Negroes didn't seem to be getting anywhere in Selma. Only
  one hundred and twenty-something-odd were registered in the entire
  county at that time. Selma is just the largest city in the county. But
  there were a lot of Negroes in other parts of the county. And every
  time one of us went down to the courthouse to register, the registrar
  would be out to lunch or he would say it was closed for the day or
  would quiz you on something he knew you couldn't answer. One of
  their favorite questions was "How many bubbles are there in a bar
  of soap?"
    So I was thinking about all of this and getting angrier by the
  moment. So I called my friend, Amelia Boynton, who is now Amelia
  Billips. She was active in the civil rights movement so I asked her what
  could be done about it. We ended up talking about what was going
  on around here. We didn't have any kind of movement then or any
  major registration effort. It took them years to register me, but Mrs.
  Boynton and I were both registered at that time, which had to have
  been the winter of 1963. Anyway, we discussed conducting a class to
  teach black folks how to fill out the application and how to act once
  they got down to the courthouse. You see, attitude could make a
  difference. They had to register a Negro every now and then so the
  ones they did register had the right attitudes. So it was stuff like that
  we wanted the people to know.
210   /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

   By February of 1963 Marie Foster had begun to conduct a voter
registration class. She kept a daily roster of who attended classes and
who passed the tests she and the other instructors gave. In the
summer of 1963 she met Assistant Attorney General John Doar,
head of the Civil Rights Division in the u.S. Department of Justice,
who was working on a voting suit against Dallas County. At Doar's
request, she allowed him to take her roster to Washington. She
explained, "He wanted to let the folks in Washington know that
things were being done in the voting area in certain places in Ala-
bama." Still, the registration drive proceeded slowly: in two years of
work, only 175 more blacks were registered in the county.
   The same February that Foster had started voter registration
classes, 22-year-old Bernard Lafayette, a college student and Free-
dom Rider, came to Selma, buoyed by Foster's efforts to organize.
Lafayette represented the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Com-
mittee (SNCC)-an offshoot of King's organization, the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), in Atlanta. In a serious,
unimposing, and methodical manner, Lafayette spent months talking
with blacks from all ranks of Selma society. But, according to J. L.
Chestnut, the only black lawyer in Selma at the time, "Bernard
would strike out with most of the preachers, the teachers, the middle
class. In theory, these would be the very persons who would lead
and staff a voter registration effort. But the ties they had to the white
ruling hierarchy-the ties that established them as leaders-made
them the least likely group of all to become involved. They had the
most-the best jobs, the largest homes, the most prestige-and there-
fore the most to lose." As J. H. Owens, the president of all-black
Selma University put it, "You can't go around walking in the face of
white people one day and then beg them the next day to donate
money to your school." A well-regarded high school teacher held
Lafayette's efforts in similar low regard: "It's nothing but a mess.
That boy ought to go home. He's gonna get the white people all
stirred up, then he'll run back to Atlanta and we'll be picking up the
pieces. "4
   For months, Lafayette was unable to generate even one mass
meeting. Making little headway with adults, Lafayette then turned
to organizing the students, believing that the parents would get
involved when they saw their kids on the line. King's organization
                                   Modulating the Provocation    I 211

was successfully employing the same tactic in Birmingham that same
spring, where a frightened and lethargic black community had come
alive when Bull Connor, the infamous police chief, turned the fire
hoses on its children and sent them off to jail. Lafayette, a young
man himself, had a way with younger people. And they were ready
to act. As Chestnut pointed out, "They didn't have jobs, houses,
mortgages, or ties with the white power structure."
   In early May 1963 Sam Boynton-the stalwart NAACP organizer
and president of the Voters League-died. Lafayette seized his me-
morial service as the occasion to hold the first mass voter registration
rally. Three-hundred and fifty people came, two thirds of them teen-
agers and students, along with the local press, Sheriff Clark, and
several deputies. James Forman, head of SNCC, arrived from Atlanta
and gave an earthy, bold, and provocative speech about "what black
people were sick and tired of taking at the hands of the white man,"
and telling them "to come out in the open with their views on
freedom and get themselves down to the registration office the next
week to hasten the day of reckoning." People shouted, "Say it!" and
"Amen." Now, both black and white people of Selma were alerted. 5
   One month later, on June 12, the night after Wallace's stand in
the "schoolhouse door" at the University of Alabama, two white
men attacked and beat Lafayette with the butt of a rifle. With eyes
and face swollen and bruised, and with blood caked-up on his
T-shirt, Lafayette saw another opportunity. "This is the symbol we
need," he said. He spent weeks wearing that T-shirt, which became,
as Chestnut recalls, "a sort of turning point in terms of public
sympathy in Black Selma. Even the blacks who were most apprehen-
sive about him couldn't help but respect his commitment and cour-
age, and they damn sure didn't go for anybody beating him. People
were impressed that he didn't leave town."6
   After Lafayette returned to college Marie Foster, Fred Reese,
Amelia Boynton, and other black activists in Selma's Voters League
continued the mass meetings. A replacement from SNCC helped in
the effort. Marie Foster recalls what went on during the meetings:

  Sheriff Jim Clark and his deputies would come to just about all of
  our meetings to observe and to so-called keep the order. In a way we
  did not want them there, being as how they tried to degrade us. In
212   /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

  another way, we were glad they came because we could involve them
  and speak to them. The organizers would ask me to bring up a topic
  in black history every night, you know, to make the black man know
  that he was somebody, and that he had just cause to hold up his head
  ... I would stand up in the pulpit and I would tell them, "You know
  I thought white people were supposed to have a lot of sense"-and
  I'd be looking right at Clark or his men-"but it seems that Selma
  white folks don't have much sense. I am sick of going into these stores
  running up two and three hundred dollar bills. You mean to tell me
  that our money is good but we are not good enough to be called MR.
  Brown or MISS Johnson." And the crowds would go wild clapping
  and cheering in agreement.

   Finally, in July of 1964, the authorities stepped in. Dallas County
Sheriff Jim Clark persuaded Alabama Circuit Court Judge James
Hare to prohibit Selma's black citizens from meeting in groups of
more than five.? After a while Selma's blacks began to meet secretly,
and soon decided that the injunction would have to be broken. In
late summer 1964 they contacted Dr. King at the national headquar-
ters of the SCLC in Atlanta, Georgia. 8 He and his staff had been
discussing the possibility of conducting a voting rights campaign.
They knew that in the wake of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the
issue of voting rights was not yet ripe. President Johnson had told
them that it would take a few years before anybody would be ready
to pass more civil rights legislation. 9 But the movement was not
about to stop pressing. On the contrary, the victories of that year
strengthened their resolve to fight for the right to vote. If the issue
was not yet ripe, they would ripen it. No more waiting. King ex-
plained their attitude in his "Letter from Birmingham Jail" the year
before. In response to eight white clergyman who had published a
statement decrying King's "unwise and untimely" activities, and who
asked King to wait and give the new city government in Birmingham
a chance, King wrote,
  Perhaps it is easy for those who have never felt the stinging darts of
  segregation to say, "Wait." But when you have seen vicious mobs
  lynch your mothers and fathers at will and drown your sisters and
  brothers at whim; when you have seen hate-filled policemen curse,
  kick and even kill your black brothers and sisters; when you see the
                                    Modulating the Provocation     / 213

  vast majority of your twenty million Negro brothers smothering in an
  airtight cage of poverty in the midst of an affluent society; when you
  suddenly find your tongue twisted and your speech stammering as you
  seek to explain to your six-year-old daughter why she can't go to the
  public amusement park that has just been advertised on television,
  and see tears welling up in her eyes when she is told that Funtown is
  closed to colored children, and see ominous clouds of inferiority
  beginning to form in her little mental sky, and see her beginning to
  distort her personality by developing an unconscious bitterness toward
  white people; when you have to concoct an answer for a five-year-old
  son who is asking: "Daddy, why do white people treat colored people
  so mean?"; when you take a cross-country drive and find it necessary
  to sleep night after night in the uncomfortable corners of your auto-
  mobile because no hotel will accept you; when you are humiliated day
  in and day out by nagging signs reading "white" and "colored"; when
  your first name becomes "nigger," your middle name becomes "boy"
  (however old you are) and your last name becomes "John," and your
  wife and mother are never given the respected title "Mrs."; when you
  are harried by day and haunted by night by the fact that you are a
  Negro, living constantly at tiptoe stance, never quite knowing what
  to expect next, and are plagued with inner fears and outer resent-
  ments; when you are forever fighting a degenerating sense of "nobodi-
  ness"-then you will understand why we find it difficult to wait. 10

To King and his colleagues, the country had to face its own internal
contradiction: the gap between what it said and what it did. Would
it live according to its professed value of equal opportunity?
   King's strategic challenge was to dramatize that question on a
nationwide scale. If the movement could find a way to get people
countrywide to face that contradiction, perhaps policies would
change. As they saw it, they would have to expose more fully the
hidden brutalities of racism. To compel the country to pay attention,
they would disturb the daily equilibrium of people's lives and jar
people into focusing on the ruthless cost of racist voting policies. But
letters and words alone would not do it.
   At the time of the call from Selma, King and his strategists had
already decided to take action and had been searching the South for
cities likely to react brutally to peaceful black demonstrations. Now,
214   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

with this call, Selma seemed like the right place. In Jim Clark, Dallas
County had just the right kind of sheriff. In George Wallace, Ala-
bama had just the right kind of governor. And black Selma was ready
to take action. Ralph Abernathy, cofounder of the SCLC, described
the thinking of the organizers.
  We had been circling around Selma, trying to decide whether or not
  we could stir up enough trouble to force the federal government to
  act on the persistent denial of voting rights to blacks in the South.
  For several reasons [Selma] seemed like a ... good place to make our
  stand. First, the local authorities were unreasonable and intransigent
  ... they were unwilling to make any compromises and seemed likely
  to respond with oppressive measures if challenged. Sheriff Clark ...
  had a temper that could get him into trouble, a temper we were
  counting on, because when he was angry, he could use his power with
  ... ruthless abandon. So we would get our confrontation on televi-
  sion, the kind of visual conflict that would best define for the viewing
  public what we were up against. Second, the local black churches were
  powerful, and there were several leaders on whom we could rely for
  support . . . Third, the voting issue itself required emphasis at this
  particular stage of the movement and no community so clearly [as
  Selma] reflected the need for intervention in this matter. 11

They announced that the campaign would be launched on January
1, 1965, one hundred and two years after Lincoln's Emancipation
Proclamation had taken effect.
  City and county officials in Selma reacted to the news by trying
to maintain the status quo, but their efforts were complicated by a
split in their authority structure. Selma was the county seat for Dallas
County, Alabama, and voting registration took place within the
county courthouse which sat in the middle of town. That meant that
the county police had jurisdiction over the courthouse itself, while
the city police had jurisdiction over the rest of the city. They shared
the same end in response to the demonstrations, but had sharply
divergent strategies. County officials reflexively tried to suppress the
protest; city officials tried to accommodate it.
  Selma had just elected a new mayor, Joe Smitherman, an appliance
salesman who had ousted the incumbent with a pledge to bring in
                                   Modulating the Provocation / 215

new industry, which also meant preserving the city's peace and sta-
bility. That meant no displays of public violence such as those that
brought notoriety to Birmingham and its police chief. Consequently,
Smitherman appointed the relatively progressive Wilson Baker to
head the police department. Baker, who had taught law enforcement
for six years at the University of Alabama and had studied the last
decade's interaction between the civil rights movement and police,
hoped to defuse any protests by quietly meeting some of the pro-
tester's demands: "If you give a little, you won't have to give a lot,"
he counseled. "Let 'em march and it'll peter out."12 In late Novem-
ber, as soon as he heard of King's plan to march in Selma, he flew
to Washington to persuade the Justice department to get King to
delay the march six months, by which time he said he would get the
County Board of Registrars quietly to register black people in larger
numbers. 13
   The Justice Department in Washington saw in Baker's plan a way
to prevent more civil rights disorder. The Department had lived
through years of unrest and quite courageously had repeatedly pro-
tected civil rights activists in the South. They were not eager for more
turbulence. Burke Marshall, head of the Civil Rights Division, was
persuaded by Baker, who was nothing like the defiant and bullying
lawmen he had occasionally known in the South. So Marshall called
Dr. King in Atlanta and made the request. But King refused. "The
die is cast," said Marshall. "They're coming to Selma in January."
Then, as Baker prepared to leave, Robert Kennedy, the outgoing
Attorney General who had been sitting in on the meetings, spoke up.
"You know," he said to Baker, "if you're smart enough, you can beat
him [King] at his own game."14
  Baker was smart enough. His strategy of pacification was simple.
He knew that a demonstration would draw little attention unless it
was resisted. And Baker did not plan to resist. Indeed, he planned
to protect the marchers from any disturbance that might be caused
by angry white citizens. Baker would maintain equilibrium by letting
the demonstrators wear themselves out. As long as the city's response
was peaceful, he would win. There might be arrests for violating
Hare's injunction, but no spectacles.
  Baker's formal authority, however, was limited by his jurisdiction.
216   /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

He could not control what might occur at the county courthouse
itself or on the other side of the Edmund Pettus Bridge, past the city
line. Baker's problem was not only Selma's angry white citizens but
also Sheriff Jim Clark of the county police and Colonel Al Lingo of
the Alabama state troopers. They would brook no disobedience of
the law by black people. In the spirit of Bull Connor, "The only way
to stop 'em is to stop 'em."15 Clark and Lingo meant to keep blacks
in their place-at any cost.
   At first, Baker seemed to be winning the contest of wills. He
repeatedly defused the daily civil rights demonstrations of January
and early February by maintaining civility. King countered by taking
more dramatic measures to galvanize attention. He got himself put
in jail and wrote to The New York Times: "This is Selma, Alabama.
There are more Negroes in jail with me than there are on the voting
rolls."16 But the message did not quite get across because Baker
prevented violence and thus staved off notoriety. Baker, quick on his
feet, kept both Clark and King largely outmaneuvered. Indeed, by
February King and his strategists began to doubt the usefulness of
Selma to demonstrate the issue of voting rights.
   But then, on February 18, state troopers broke up a registration
march in neighboring Marion, Alabama. One of the troopers began
clubbing an older woman, and when her seventeen-year-old grand-
son, Jimmee Lee Jackson, intervened to shield her, the trooper shot
Jackson through the stomach. 1? Jackson died four days later, and
people at the funeral began saying, "Damn it, we ought to carry his
body over to George Wallace in Montgomery."18
   King seized this idea and tragedy as a way to escalate the cam-
paign. They would move across the city line. He announced plans
to march from Selma to the state capitol at Montgomery fifty miles
away. King intended to go around Baker and challenge the county
and state. The strategy worked. On Sunday morning, March 7, as
the marchers crossed the city line, they came under the jurisdiction
of Sheriff Clark and Colonel Lingo. After two months of pent up
frustration, not only with the civil rights activists but also with
Wilson Baker's success at quarantining them, Clark and Lingo un-
leashed their horses, tear gas, and billy clubs while the nation
watched in horror. At once, Baker, Clark, and Lingo had lost. King
and the demonstrators had won. 19
                                  Modulating the Provocation / 217


                 Operating Beyond One's Authority
The people who first exercised leadership in Selma had no authority
to organize for voting rights. Fred Reese, head of the black teachers'
association, had formal authority for matters related to schools, but
no formal authority over matters pertaining to voter registration. His
pleas to black teachers went largely ignored. His informal authority
as clergyman, teacher, and member of the black middle class in Selma
gave him the minimum resources for leadership: some place from
which to stand and intervene. Yet his informal authority did not take
him far since it did not apply to matters of civil rights; he had no
track record. He was trusted and respected as a clergyman and
teacher, not as a lawyer or political activist. Reverend Reese spoke
up beyond his authority, formal and informal. Most preachers in
Selma did not. And though few listened immediately to Reese, he
planted seeds that sprouted. As they sprouted, he began to accrue
informal authority and its power. When black teachers finally came
around to join the demonstrations, the mobilization of black Selma
took a quantum leap forward.
   Marie Foster, like Reverend Reese, also led without authority. A
dental hygienist, she had no formal authority in the black community
in the arena of civil rights. Her informal authority consisted of the
respect that came from being a middle class black professional. That
gave her membership in the community and a place to stand, but
nothing more. The community did not look to her to speak up, yet
she did. Challenging a way of life endured for over one hundred
years, she pushed her people to live in the new discomfort and danger
zone of overt defiance. They were hardly eager to incur public hu-
miliation, the loss of jobs, and lynching. When she questioned the
black community's aspirations and commitment, she put herself and
her community at risk.
   She began, quite naturally, by turning to someone with some
informal authority in civil rights, Amelia Boynton. Together they
started educating black citizens in registering to vote. Leadership
would require learning, not just by whites but by black people as
well. The education campaign gave Foster and Boynton a new con-
stituency, and because they spoke to aspirations long suppressed and
deeply felt, they gathered informal authority. Black people in Selma
218   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY


began to look to them for direction, protection, and order in organ-
izing for voting rights.
   Bernard Lafayette set his sights on Selma because he had seen the
dedication of Reese, Foster, Boynton, and their small operation, the
Voters League. He gained their support, which provided a small
measure of informal authority, and he had his base of formal author-
ity, SNCC, which could provide tactical advice and moral encour-
agement. SNCC, however, meant little if anything to anybody in
Selma, and few people were heeding the advice of the Voters League.
For the most part, Lafayette engaged in thoroughly unauthorized
activities, speaking twenty hours a day with people who paid him
very little mind. Yet he laid the groundwork with both adults and
youth. When Sam Boynton died, Lafayette saw the opportunity to
turn the death of one of Selma's most prominent activists into a
catalytic event. And when he turned his own beaten body into a
walking illustration of the issue, he provoked a change in black
thinking and acquired the power that comes of respect. Mass meet-
ings started happening weekly.
   Unlike the activists in Selma, King had a great deal of authority.
While he had a small base of formal authority as head of the SCLC,
most of King's authority was informal. Since the Montgomery bus
boycott of 1956, he had become the singular repository for the
aspirations and pains of the black community, particularly in the
South. He had gained their admiration and trust because of his
courage and skill in mobilizing them. They provided his primary
source of power. Yet perhaps just as significant was the esteem in
which millions of sympathetic white Americans held him. He spoke
and represented their values in action, even if they had not yet begun
to bring their behavior into harmony with those values. He moved
them, and they gave him informal authority-moral authority. In-
deed, in 1964 the white world had given him the Nobel Prize for
Peace.
   King's informal authority, like Gandhi's, gave him major resources:
attention, the power to frame the issues, and some power to pace
the work, to turn up the heat or lower it. People everywhere paid
attention to him because he represented either a threat or a worthy
challenge. The activists in Selma were counting on the attention he
would bring in order to contain local hostility: brutality avoids the
                                  Modulating the Provocation / 219

limelight. At the same time, the attention King could bring might
force a more measured expression of brutality into the limelight,
where local norms would be subject to scrutiny by the larger society,
and racism would be seen for what it was. Moreover, King's informal
authority gave him the power to set the context for action, whether
it was integrated buses or voting rights. Setting the terms of the
debate enabled him to focus attention on the issues he thought were
ripe, and frame them in a way that made them understandable to a
wide public audience. He gave meaning to events. When whites
began to give in a little and blacks in Selma wanted to accept the
offer and back off on the demonstrations, he had the authority to
remind them "to keep [their] eyes on the prize: This movement [is]
about winning citizenship for black people in America, not about
having a march in Selma. "20 He was able to keep up the heat.
   King's power, however, was by no means absolute. After Selma,
once black anguish and aspirations had been unleashed, not even
King had the informal authority to provide the necessary holding
environment and direct them productively. This became clear six
months later in August 1965 when Los Angeles erupted in the Watts
riots, only weeks after passage of the Voting Rights Act. King surely
had considerable power. He could call forth and control demonstra-
tions, as he did in Selma, but even his authority within the black
community had sharp limits.


           Reading the Authority Figure as a Barometer
When he demonstrated in Selma, King perturbed the nation. Millions
of Americans were forced to confront their own complicity with the
hard realities of racism. But because he led people who had not asked
to be led,going beyond whatever authority some Americans had
given him, King had no control over the system's resilience. He could
adjust the level of challenge, but he could not increase the system's
capacity to tolerate it. In leading people who gave him no authority,
his success and survival depended on his own sensitivity to the
severity of the stress he generated and the pace at which he did so.
His interventions had to take into account the level of distress the
larger system could withstand.
   A leader needs indicators. But because he is inclined to focus on
220   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

a single issue, one who leads beyond his authority will often have
little information about the other sources of stress in the system. He
may challenge the system too far and too fast and invite his own
suppression. He has to understand, therefore, the response patterns
of the community into which he intervenes. Inevitably, he gains this
understanding through trial and error in action, by analyzing the
sources of his wounds as he gets them. But are there other, better
ways for leaders operating beyond their authority to know when
they have gone too far? What, for example, should the Chinese
students have known in Tiananmen Square before they pushed the
government so far in the spring of 1989 that it smashed them and
avoided the issues they exposed?21
    One barometer of systemic distress is the behavior of people in
senior positions of authority. Connected into the many issues facing
the whole community, senior authorities tend to respond as a sum
of the forces at play. They are called into action as the stressed
community gazes upward for direction, protection, and order. They
often react to these appeals by taking action to restore equilibrium,
and that reaction indicates when the community has reached the
limits of its tolerance-at least in the view of the persons in authority.
    Of course, in the same positions of authority, different people will
act in different ways. They will each have their own distinct, personal
styles; and while some will encourage their constituents to confront
change, others will cling to old realities. But if authorities do not
always lead, they almost always act at some point to reduce stress,
which they are adept at perceiving. In general, authorities are exqui-
sitely sensitive to the fears and expectations of those who authorize
them, as they must be in order to keep their jobs. Authorities are at
least partly reactive: they may be puppets as much as puppeteers,
and, as puppets, may provide useful cues to those who lead without
authority.
   Thus, King had to keep his eyes on Johnson, and the local activists
in Selma had to keep their eyes on Joe Smitherman, Wilson Baker,
Jim Clark, and George Wallace. The movement's strategy and tactics
had to account for these personalities and the pressures of their
positions and constituencies. Attacks by authority would be symp-
tomatic of systemic distress. Leading without authority, therefore,
became a sort of modern ballet-somewhat choreographed, some-
                                  Modulating the Provocation    /   221

what improvised-in response to those in authority, with the wider
public as the audience.
   As the level of black aspiration and rhetoric rose in Selma, white
people began to feel challenged. Sheriff Clark started showing up at
black meetings. His attendance at these meetings was a measure of
the stress they provoked. When he then arranged a year later for a
court order prohibiting meetings of more than five people, he pro-
vided a further signal of intensifying stress in the white community.
The authority system had gone into action to restore equilibrium.
   That meant that the strategic decisions for the activists would
begin to involve much higher stakes. In the past, civil rights workers
had often backed down at this point in the process for fear of being
brutally suppressed. The local white community, stressed beyond its
limit of tolerance, was expected to recoil in the harshest way. Indeed,
had Selma been left to its own devices without the presence of federal
and media attention, it would surely have beaten down the black
challenge.
   But Selma was not alone. By 1965 civil rights activists had learned
over decades how to use the federal government to contain the local
disequilibrium they generated. Thus, the strategic decision for Reese,
Foster, and Boynton was whether or not to move the issue into the
national arena, using media attention and federal authority to pre-
vent a brutal "quick fix" restoration of local order by local authori-
ties.
   They decided to push Selma past the breaking point, and that
meant that the nation and the federal government would have to
provide the holding environment. It also meant that people might
die. As much as possible, national attention and federal force would
have to contain and control the distress in Selma and its potential
for violence. Reese, Foster, and Boynton called on King to turn Selma
into a national symbol of injustice.
   Now the strategic challenge was King's. He and his strategists
would have to monitor the level of distress they would generate. At
the local level, they aimed to move beyond the limit of tolerance in
order to provoke the kind of brutal work avoidance that would
awaken the national conscience. But at the national level, they would
have to keep the distress within the proper range-above the thresh-
old for stimulating public and political engagement with the issue,
222   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

but below the breaking point. At all costs, they wanted to avert work
avoidance on a national scale, which might occur if people had an
excuse for rationalizing away racism and police brutality. Conse-
quently, King's organization, the SCLC, tried very hard to restrain
the militant forces within the black community. When Malcolm X
came to Selma in early February, King's strategists did everything
they could to maintain their control over the demonstrations, even
though, as it turned out, Malcolm X did nothing incendiary.22 Were
the nation to feel threatened above its limit of tolerance, King and
his movement might lose the whole campaign.
   King and the SCLC monitored how hard they could push the
nation by monitoring the actions of the President. As senior author-
ity figure for the nation, President Johnson's responses would indi-
cate how well the public at large could tolerate the adaptive challenge
issuing from Selma. As the issue began to heat up, everything looked
good. In his State of the Union address in mid-January, Johnson
spoke briefly of the need for a new law to protect the voting rights
of black people. In early February, while King briefly sat in a Selma
jail, Johnson issued a statement reiterating his support for voting
rights. Within the Justice Department, Johnson reactivated plans to
draft a voting rights bill. Then King, after his release from jail,
requested a meeting at the White House with Johnson and left feeling
encouraged about the President's intention to submit strong voting
rights legislation. 23 So far, Johnson did not seem alarmed by the
demonstrations. Yet Johnson continued to voice doubt about the
timing. The nation and Congress did not seem ready to pass a bill
with real potency that would give federal officials control over voter
registration.
   So King turned up the heat on February 22, announcing his plan
for the fifty-mile march to Montgomery. By early March, Congress
began to soften. On March 2 Everett Dirksen came out in favor of
voting rights legislation. But on the next day, the Senate Rules
Committee voted not to recommend a change in the Senate's cloture
rules, which made passage of strong legislation much less likely. As
a result, King held steady with his plans for the march. On Friday,
March 5, King met with President Johnson once again. Apparently,
Johnson said nothing to King to discourage the demonstrations. 24
Yet he also could not promise that the voting rights bill would
contain the clauses that King thought were crucial to its success: the
                                   Modulating the Provocation    I 223

 use of federal registrars in those counties that denied the vote to
 black people. If King were reading Johnson as a barometer on how
hard to push, King was pushing just the right amount: not too much,
 but not too little. Johnson was neither unduly disturbed nor ready
to act.
   The march took place on Sunday, March 7. After the brutality of
that day, the level of national disequilibrium rose steeply. The media
called it Bloody Sunday. Suddenly, thousands of people cared about
this issue. White people were demonstrating in major cities across
the country, and millions seemed to be calling on Johnson and the
 Congress to take action. 25 People were learning. King held firm, and,
fortunately, so did Johnson. On Sunday evening, King announced
another march for Tuesday and invited clergy from all denomina-
tions across the nation to join with him.
   But behind the scenes, as the level of distress reached its peak, the
negotiating began. On Monday, March 8, lawyers from the SCLC
appealed to Federal Judge Frank Johnson Jr. for a temporary re-
straining order to prevent Clark and Lingo from interfering with
Tuesday's march. King and Abernathy thought that enough blood
had been shed to make the point to the nation. Jimmee Lee Jackson
had been the first person ever killed in an SCLC campaign.26 The
civil rights movement did not need another brutal beating or more
deaths to get its point across. It simply needed to keep the nation's
attention focused on the issue.
   Although sympathetic to the cause of civil rights, Judge Johnson
disliked the idea of a massive march so soon after Sunday. Instead
of restraining Clark and Lingo, he asked the activists to delay their
demonstration until he could hear the State's case on Thursday,
March 11. Perhaps the Judge sympathized with widespread public
dismay over the prospect of a poorly planned fifty-mile march, with
no real safeguards against violence. Even a federal restraining order
could not really guarantee a safe journey. Judge Johnson saw no need
to rush. 27
   King, however, rebuffed the Judge's request for delay. He wanted
to maintain momentum. In response, the Judge turned his request
into an order. 28 Now, a federal judge had drawn the line. He enjoined
SCLC not to march until after Thursday's hearing. That meant that
the demonstration would violate not only state law but federal law
as well. King was coming up against the nation's boundary-its limit
224   /   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

of tolerance. Breaking federal law would not be so easily accepted
by Congress and the public.
   On Monday night President Johnson sent a mediator aboard Air
Force One to negotiate with King to delay the march. This indicated
clearly that King had reached President johnson's limit. If Tuesday's
demonstration turned into another bloody spectacle, the nation
would blame President Johnson, and not just state and local officials,
for failing to step in. Furthermore, Johnson could not sit passively
by in the face of a federal court order. King would go too far if he
marched again, unleashing violence. By Monday evening King and
Abernathy were not sure what to do. Thousands of people had
traveled to Selma that day to march with them on Tuesday. Could
they simply call the whole thing off? And if they could, would doing
so take all the pressure off Congress and the nation?
   LeRoy Collins, President johnson's emissary as the new head of
the Justice Department's Community Relations Service, woke up
King and Abernathy early in the morning on Tuesday to work out
a deal. Instead of undertaking the march to Montgomery, he sug-
gested that they make a symbolic journey, retracing the route on
Bloody Sunday and stopping at the point on the Edmund Pettus
Bridge where the beatings had taken place. Collins said he would get
Clark and Lingo to agree.
   For King and Abernathy, leadership meant keeping the disturbance
within a range that Johnson could tolerate. So they marched with
thousands singing, "Ain't Gonna Let Nobody Turn Me Round."
And when they reached the middle of the bridge, King and Aber-
nathy stopped, held a prayer, and then turned around. The point
had been made. Distress had reached the limit of tolerance, and the
pressure had been maintained just below that limit as the nation
watched the procession and held its breath.



              Becoming a Lightning Rod of Attention
Attention has its costs and benefits. Authority figures, like silverback
gorillas in mountain forests, draw attention by virtue of their height
and position. For them, being the center of attention is not necessar-
ily dangerous. Groups are inclined to protect their authority figures
for quite a while, out of habit as much as fear of the disorientation
                                    Modulating the Provocation    I 225

that might follow their dismissal. It takes a prolonged period of
disappointment for a community to turn on its authorities.
   But without authority, a leader stands relatively naked before the
people, often appearing to be not only the identifier of a distressing
problem but also the source of the distress itself. All eyes turn to the
person who raises disturbing questions, and some of those eyes are
hostile. Groups can avoid problems, at least temporarily, by shooting
the messenger. Thus, although attention is a major tool of leadership,
it also makes one a likely target of attack. If a person lacks authority,
people take issue not only with the substance of his point of view
but with his right to raise it. Indeed, they often attack the right and
ignore the substance.
   The mechanisms for killing the messenger are varied and subtle
depending on the culture, the organization, and the problem. Yet
attacks often follow a general pattern: first, a person or faction raises
a difficult question that generates some distress by pointing to a
potential conflict over values and purpose, norms and organizational
relationships, power, or strategy. Second, in response, the disquieted
members of the system will turn their gaze to a senior authority
figure, expecting him to restore equilibrium. Finally, the authority
figure, pressed by these expectations to reduce distress, feeling emo-
tionally compelled to act, neutralizes or silences the "problem" fac-
tion, directly or indirectly. These moves happen fast. The authority
figure may not even be aware of the way others have gotten him to
perform the role of executioner on their behalf.
   A major challenge of leadership, therefore, is to draw attention
and then deflect it to the questions and issues that need to be faced.
To do so, one has to provide a context for action. The audience needs
to readily comprehend the purpose of unusual or deviant behavior
so that it focuses less on the behavior itself, or the person, and more
on its meaning.
   Martin Luther King Jr. became the lightning rod of attention on
civil rights. His every move and behavior became subject to scrutiny,
not simply by the media and the public but also by the authority
structure. Just as Sheriff Clark sat in on the early voting rights
meetings in Selma, FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover tapped King's daily
phone conversations, gathering data that would discredit him if
made public.
   King knew of the wiretaps; he knew of the dangers he ran by
226   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

operating at the focal point. Always, he was at risk for making
mistakes-both personal mistakes, like sexual indiscretions, and tac-
tical mistakes, of which there were many.29 King repeatedly ran the
risk of public exposure and humiliation. The slightest error could be
used against him. Being the lightning rod of attention meant that
many people would find a humiliating downfall entertaining.
   But he could not hide from scrutiny and still maintain pressure on
the nation's conscience. The solution for King, both sincere and
strategic, was to become a living embodiment of the issue to which
he wanted to draw attention. King turned the dilemma of becoming
a lightning rod to his advantage. The attention inevitably directed
toward him would then be directed toward the issues of civil rights.
Personal events were given larger meanings.
   Bernard Lafayette made the same choice when he spent three
weeks walking around in a blood-stained T-shirt. So did Gandhi by
spinning cotton each day and by wearing his traditional loincloth
and homespun shawl, even to Buckingham Palace to visit the King. 30
So did Sanger when civic authorities in Boston refused her the right
to speak in 1929. She stood silent before a crowd at Ford Hall Forum
with a band of tape plastered across her mouth while the Harvard
historian Arthur Schlesinger Sr. read a brief statement: "As a pioneer
fighting for a cause, I believe in free speech. As a propagandist, I see
immense advantages in being gagged. It silences me, but it makes
millions of others talk and think about the cause in which I live. "31
   King, as well, would have to embody personally the issue he stood
for. That meant that he would have to struggle constantly with
himself to live according to a very high set of standards. In the wake
of the events in Selma, Reese, Foster, and Boynton had the same hard
personal challenge. All became objects of idealization and scrutiny.
Their leadership could not take place behind the scenes-like Presi-
dent Johnson's leadership on voting rights. Thus, King had to use
his person as a dramatic tool. Indeed, Abernathy and others delib-
erately placed him at the focal point in his early days of the 1956
bus boycott in Montgomery because King, a newcomer to town, was
willing to take the heat and had the rhetorical skill to use it.
   Yet however much King embodied civil rights, he never became
the issue. The distinction is important. King only represented the
issue, and most people, I think, could tell the difference. The context
                                   Modulating the Provocation    I 227

of his activity was clear. Few people thought King was the source of
the civil rights perspective, even if they knew him as chief spokesman
and strategist. When he put himself in jail, the import was plainly
symbolic. When he was killed, few thought the cause of civil rights
was dead, even if it was strategically at an impasse. Indeed, even after
his death he continued to represent civil rights because the cause was
alive in others.
   President Johnson's behavior illustrates the other side of the dis-
tinction. Johnson went way beyond representing the cause of the
Vietnam War. By virtue of taking on the role of solitary decision-
maker, he became the issue-his judgment, dishonesty, and style. It
became Johnson's War because there was no other obvious way to
make sense of events except to attribute them to him. Consequently,
when Johnson withdrew in March 1968 from running again for
President, many people thought the war was over. They failed to see
that he had been a puppet as much as puppeteer. The continuation
of the war represented not simply the actions of the President but
potent trends and conflicting perspectives within the American polity.
Rather than orchestrate these conflicts, Johnson had stood alone,
making it appear that he alone was the issue. In contrast, on civil
rights, as with much of his domestic program, Johnson gave adaptive
work back to the society.
   And so did King when he produced the spectacle of the police
beating the marchers for the watching eyes of national television.
Cynical commentators might try to portray the marching blacks as
the witless puppets of the manipulative King. But such a contortion
of facts would not explain away the television images of state troop-
ers and policemen beating defenseless people who asked for the right
to vote. By dramatizing forcefully the contradictions within the na-
tion, King made people feel the contradictions in their own attitudes.
In this way, he deflected attention 'from himself to the issu(.s and
spread responsibility for working them through. The nation could
not easily attribute its contradictions to King.

                     Mobilizing the Stakeholders
Leaders without authority-deviants, as they often are perceived-
have to think hard about where they direct their challenge. Indeed,
228   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

the better the quality of their argument, the more likely it will touch
on an internal contradiction in the community and thus arouse or
aggravate conflicts, which then call forth authoritative efforts to
restore order. Hence, a leader who pushes the authority figure in an
attempt to solve important problems should expect the authority
figure to strike back, not necessarily from personal motivations but
from the community's pressure on him to maintain equilibrium.
   Authority's rejection of challenge represents a complex dynamic.
A leader without authority can easily oversimplify the complexity of
the situation by interpreting the rejection as an indication of a flawed
presentation, an inadequate argument, or the personal bias of the
authority figure. Certainly, there may be some truth here and impor-
tant lessons to draw in devising the next move. However, the rejec-
tion generally originates with the community of stakeholders that
resist a disturbance of their equilibrium. The authority is their proxy.
Indeed, the authority may be personally sympathetic but may see no
options, given the expectations he carries. Thus, returning to the
authority figure with an "improved version" of the presentation that
takes his biases into account often leads nowhere. 32
   Any challenge must mobilize the real stakeholders, not just their
proxies. One begins with four questions: Who are the primary stake-
holders in this issue, and how might they need to change their ways?
What expectations do they have of their authority? How could the
authority figure begin to reshape those expectations to provide him-
self with latitude to take action? And what could one do, leading
without authority, to reshape those expectations to pave his way?
   The events in Selma illustrate the principle of mobilizing the stake-
holders. Fred Reese, Marie Foster, Amelia Boynton, and Bernard
Lafayette did not take on the authority system in Selma directly. They
took on their own relevant public-black citizens whose compliance
with the system helped to keep it in place. No awakening of white
citizens could precede awakening black people to stand behind their
own aspirations. Had anyone of these four activists staged a lone
demonstration on the steps of the courthouse, Sheriff Clark would
have disposed of them easily, while both white and black citizens
watched, many with glee, many with despair, at the futility of the
act.
   Similarly, Abernathy and King did not take on the President di-
                                    Modulating the Provocation / 229

rectly. Abernathy describes their moment of reckoning on Tuesday
morning after praying on the Edmund Pettus Bridge.
  When I finally finished [the prayer] and lifted my head, I turned
  around. The troopers were gone. They had retreated to one side and
  left before us an empty highway, a straight shot to Montgomery, the
  asphalt glistening as brightly as the Yellow Brick Road. It was as if I
  had prayed them out of our way.
    I looked at Martin [Luther King] and he looked at me. For an instant
  I'm sure he must have been tempted to plunge forward into that gap,
  with troopers on both sides of the road. Maybe that's what George
  Wallace and Jim Clark wanted us to do. Had we broken our word
  and violated the injunction, we would have been fair game. They
  could have arrested all of us-or as many as they could haul away-
  and we would have been discredited by everyone in authority. Even
  Lyndon Johnson could not have defended our actions, if indeed he
  had wanted to. And we could never again have looked Collins in the
  eye. 33

   Abernathy and King avoided the trap of directing their challenge
at the top authority figure. Instead, they targeted the nation and,
indirectly, Congress. The President would be expected to act on civil
rights only insofar as his constituents gave him leeway. The best the
President might do would be to hold steady while the pressure on
the nation and on Congress increased-while the issue became a
public priority. Then the President's latitude would widen and he
could shepherd new civil rights legislation through Congress. The
behavior of authority would be changed as social sentiment changed.
   In fact, this had been the civil rights leaders' general strategy for
several years. They had used it before. Following sustained demon-
strations in Birmingham and in preparation for the March on Wash-
ington in August 1963 to push for civil rights legislation, for
example, King and his colleagues had targeted the public, not Presi-
dent Kennedy. As a result, Kennedy had the latitude to get behind
them in his hastily arranged but formal and dramatic speech on civil
rights in June 1963. 34 To be sure, King and Abernathy lobbied and
monitored those in authority, but they aimed their actions toward
the larger relevant publics: black communities needing encourage-
ment, discipline, and organization, and white communities across the
230   I   LEADING WITHOUT AUTHORITY

land, many of which could be persuaded to promote civil rights-if
forced to acknowledge that their legal system betrayed the values the
law was supposed to represent. King explained the strategy in his
"Letter from Birmingham Jail" in April 1963:

  You may well ask: "Why direct action? Why sit-ins, marches and so
  forth? Isn't negotiation a better path?" You are quite right in calling
  for negotiation. Indeed, this is the very purpose of direct action.
  Nonviolent direct action seeks to create such a crisis and foster such
  a tension that a community which has constantly refused to negotiate
  is forced to confront the issue. It seeks so to dramatize the issue that
  it can no longer be ignored. My citing the creation of tension as part
  of the work of the nonviolent-resister may sound rather shocking. But
  I must confess that I am not afraid of the word "tension." I have
  earnestly opposed violent tension, but there is a type of constructive,
  nonviolent tension which is necessary for growth. 35

   To use this strategy, King and his collaborators had to become
masters in the use of the media for public communication. However
improvised their tactics, they were dramatists in the shaping of
teaching moments for each of their audiences, be it rallies, sermons,
sit-ins, marches, boycotts, letters from prison, or freedom rides. At
the end of the day, some people might have to take a beating or die,
but learning took place. Attitudes and habits changed. Values were
clarified and behaviors became more consonant with them. Selma
lawyer J. L. Chestnut describes in retrospect his reaction to the fact
that 9,000 black people had registered to vote in just six months:

  To say I was impressed would be an understatement. I was beside
  myself. These were people who'd been told for generations that voting
  is white folk's business, stay away from the courthouse, don't antago-
  nize white people. We came from nowhere to somewhere in an awfully
  short period of time. A voteless, hopeless people had moved in a
  matter of months to a position of almost being able to elect our own
  leaders, to govern ourselves . . . This was a monumental achievement
  and Selma couldn't be the same again.
     After centuries of ducking and dodging, black people had come out
  of the closet-and they liked the air. Folk still were concerned for
  their jobs, their mortgages and bank loans, but the blanket fear of
                                  Modulating the Provocation     /   231

upsetting anybody white was lifting. The reign of terror was over ...
That's what America is all about-freedom to breathe, freedom from
fear. That was fundamental. King often said, "The vote is not the ball
game, but it gets you inside the ballpark." That's where we were at
the end of 1965. We had gotten into the ballpark. Now we had to
learn to play the game. 36
    Part IV

Staying Alive
                               10
                     Assassination


Leadership is dangerous, with or without authority, because the
stresses of adaptive work can be severe. Ask a white man or woman
in Selma to give up the only way of life they have known, handed
down to them by their parents, reinforced through school and friend-
ships, and you ask them to undergo a sustained period of disorien-
tation and distress. Severe distress can make people cruel; empathy,
compassion, and flexibility of mind are sacrificed to the desperate
desire for order.
   People who lead frequently bear scars from their efforts to bring
about adaptive change. Often they are silenced. On occasion, they
are killed. If leadership must always demand great personal sacrifice,
then our communities and organizations must wait for the occasional
hero. And many of us are indeed waiting. Unfortunately, the adaptive
pressures on us wait for no one. If we want to generate more
leadership in our society, we have two options. We can embolden a
greater number of people toward heroic effort, and we can investi-
gate ways to lead that reduce the likelihood of personal injury, even
to the hero, so that more people can step into the fray. Although
these avenues are not mutually exclusive, we follow the second route
here. To do this, we first investigate the question, Why is leading
dangerous?
   Leaders are always failing somebody. With or without authority,
someone exercising leadership will be shouldering the pains and
aspirations of a community and frustrating at least some people
                                 235
236   I   STAYING ALIVE

within it. Adaptive work often demands loss. Even a bright new
innovation or scientific discovery will meet resistance from those that
feel threatened. At the very best, the loss will be temporary and more
a matter of perception than reality. The future may be better, but
some must bear the risk.! The black teachers of Selma, representing
the small black middle class, strongly resisted joining in the civil
rights demonstrations in 1965 for fear that they would lose the
measure of respect, authority, and security they had worked hard to
achieve. In the end, they did not have to sustain that loss, but at the
moment of decision, to join in or stay away, the perceived risk of
loss powerfully shaped their behavior. Indeed, overcoming that fear
of loss required heroic efforts on the part of a few activist teachers
and movement organizers. They did not gainsay the risk, but they
did buffer the perception of risk by explaining to teachers why the
movement's strategy might work, and they inspired and mobilized
teachers to take risks by speaking to their anger, frustrations, and
hopes, if not for themselves, then for the young people in their
classrooms.
   Often, however, the loss is real and sustained; adaptation for some
people means accepting the loss, defining and solving problems
emerging from the loss, and making the best of it by finding the next
opportunity. The losses to Steve Buchanan and his family are obvi-
ous. Only a little less stark were the losses of Asarco copper plant
workers in Tacoma. They lost their jobs; they had to pick up and
find new work. For some, that meant uprooting their homes and
families. The white people in Selma, Alabama, faced losses in terms
of identity, social structure, and political power. Civil rights meant a
change in their way of life.
   Leaders and authority figures get attacked, dismissed, silenced, and
sometimes assassinated because they come to represent loss, real or
perceived, to those members of the community who feel that they
have gotten, or might get, the bad end of a bargain. Even if people
hope for a positive-sum outcome, fear provokes defense, particularly
if the stakes are high. At these times, taking authority itself is risky,
whether or not one exercises leadership with it. One risks job, repu-
tation, and perhaps life.
   To describe the risks of authority (with or without leadership), I
turn back to the distinction between authority and leadership.
                                                Assassination   /   237

Authority figures become repositories of hope by virtue of taking
office. As long as they meet expectations, perhaps by changing those
expectations as did Parsons and Ruckelshaus, authorities retain the
good will of their constituents. But they also become repositories of
frustration to those whose expectations they have failed. In relatively
stable periods of time, these failures may not be of much significance
and passion, and an authority figure can survive without too much
wear and tear. Humming along on routine problems, people can
operate according to well-understood procedures without much dis-
appointment.
   In unstable times, however, when norms and procedures break
down, adaptive pressures are high, and disequilibrium is rising, the
expectations and frustrations with authority build as well. At those
times, an authority figure, even one who does not exercise leader-
ship-someone who colludes with his community in avoiding adap-
tive work in an effort to restore equilibrium-will risk attack and
loss of office. As the passions in the society mount, and as the
mechanisms being used to restore equilibrium fail, the authority
figure becomes the likely scapegoat. Minimally, people expect him to
maintain equilibrium in turbulent times. Failing that, he comes to
represent the loss of stability.
   In these times, exercising leadership may be the authority figure's
most likely route to staying alive. If the adaptive challenge cannot
persistently be avoided-by using a denial, a diversion, a scapegoat,
an external enemy, or the like-then the authority figure will pay the
consequences for having failed to prepare the society for the current
crisis. He will be blamed and, quite often, brought down. Much less
subject to scrutiny by the society is the degree to which the authority
figure had been colluding, sometimes unwittingly, with its avoidance
of festering problems. His popularity is based on his collusion. But
members of society do not blame themselves. The authority figure
takes the blame.
   This scapegoating of the authority figure is surely unfair. Commu-
nities often give authority to an individual to provide direction,
protection, and order, yet they resist the kind of leadership on the
part of people in authority that would put the challenge of adaptive
change back on themselves. The authority figure is placed in a double
bind, a Catch-22. Upon meeting up with adaptive problems, the
238   /   STAYING ALIVE

authority figure, still bearing expectations for direction, is pressured
not to provide direction that generates the pain or loss which tend
to accompany adaptation. He is expected to protect, but not if
protection means challenge.
   Scapegoating authority is also unproductive. The dynamic rein-
forces the social tendency in times of distress to shirk broad respon-
sibility for doing adaptive work. As long as the society continues to
place the burden on the back of authority, neglecting to face the need
for change, then it may slowly deteriorate, as may be the case in
some of our communities, or spiral into a series of revolutions in
which one dictator is replaced by another, each looking quite differ-
ent as he institutes a "new order"; but the political culture of de-
pendency does not change. 2
   Not uncommonly, the authority's downfall takes on a sacred air.
Corazon Aquino described the casting out of Ferdinand Marcos as
"indeed a miracle ... a symbol of God's love and the task he set us
to do."3 Overthrowing Marcos made the crimes he committed ex-
traordinarily important. They were not always so. During more
stable times, his corruption had very little power to attract attention
or diminish his appeal; it was later, in times of festering adaptive
pressures, that his sins required atonement. As a historian of religion
describes, the sacrifice "is an attempt to make a fresh start by driving
away the accumulation of evil that hinders divine beneficence."4
   Yet the redemptive power of sacrifice is often illusory. Continuing
to operate as if the crisis comprised only a technical problem, people
look for a technical solution-deposing the authority figure. But
when he is gone, the problems remain. The new savior who replaces
him is bound to disappoint. (In his time Marcos had been viewed as
a savior as well.)5
   The accumulation of evil never resides in one person at the top
because no one gets to the top without representing the interests of
the dominant factions in the system. The evil, if it is evil at all, lives
in the routine ways in which people throughout the system collude
in maintaining a dysfunctional status quo. Changing the status quo
will always require more than simply changing the person of the
authority figure. Adaptive work requires adjustments, learning, and
compromise on the part of many among the dominant, complacent,
and beleaguered. Changing the authority figure may well usher in a
                                                  Assassination   /   239

new era, but only to the extent that she cuts against the grain and
exercises leadership, or she represents the outcome of an adaptive
process and her selection embodies a change in the orientation of the
community to its problems.
   In times of distress, people are often of mixed minds about change.
They passionately want their lives to change and they look to figures
of authority to take bold action to direct the change. Yet they also
want the change to take place with a minimum of loss to them, and
they look to authority for protection. As a consequence, an authority
in Aquino's position faces a major dilemma: she has to meet the
public- expectation for dramatic action, while taking action that
would cause real change. Genuine change requires frustrating peo-
ple's expectation that new heroic authority can deliver a new age
miraculously without widespread pain. So we have competing prin-
ciples at work: maintaining the holding power of one's authority,
which requires meeting expectations for bold action as well as pro-
tection, and promoting adaptive work, which requires anticipated or
real hardship.
   The common resolution of this strategic dilemma is to couple
boldness with protection-for example, by acting boldly on side
issues while restoring order. In the short run that seems a less risky
solution because it presents the desired image without causing much
dismay. Adaptive success over time, however, demands coupling
boldness with challenge, more than protection-risking one source
of informal authority to gain another in the form of productive
results. In Aquino's case, she might have acted boldly to institute
economic and social policies avoided during the Marcos regime but
well-tested in several newly industrialized countries: the need to
reduce the highly unequal distribution of wealth through land reform
and other means, the opening of the economy to international com-
petition, and the reduction of corruption and personal influence as
the primary currencies of power. 6

                      The Politics of Inclusion
The politics of inclusion are not faint-hearted efforts at making
everybody happy enough. Inclusion means more than taking people's
views into account in defining the problem. 7 Inclusion may mean
240   I   STAYING ALIVE

challenging people, hard and steadily, to face new perspectives on
familiar problems, to let go of old ideas and ways of life long held
sacred. Thus, inclusion does not mean that each party will get its
way. Even the most well-crafted efforts at inclusion can rarely pre-
vent the experience of loss by some. As a result, one often cannot
shield oneself from the outrage of those parties who must face loss
and are unwilling to change.
   Furthermore, from a strategic standpoint, some parties often must
be excluded from the problem-solving process. They generate more
disruption than can be contained effectively by the holding environ-
ment-the network of cohesive bonds and authority relationships
among members of the community. This is one of the trials of
leadership. Sometimes one excludes people and puts aside their per-
spectives, regardless of their validity. One silences them, actively or
by complicity. In a sense, as it will often be experienced by those
whose voices are not to be heard, one performs multiple little assas-
sinations, if not physical, then of character or capability.
   Consider the formation of the u.S. Constitution during the Federal
Convention of 1787 and the issue of slavery. During that summer,
many divisive issues had to be resolved by the framers, who repre-
sented very different perspectives on the nature of government and
the balance needed between liberty and order, local and national
control, and the division and sharing of powers. To prevent frag-
mentation into North and South, the framers made a quite deliberate
decision to avoid a strong stand on the institution of slavery. They
felt that the whole tapestry would unravel and no union would form
if slavery's future were decided then. 8
   This decision, however cruel in its effects, made sense even to some
who abhorred slavery. The union mattered more to them, and when
slavery finally was abolished, the union tested by war was strong
enough to survive. But the experience of the Civil War also illustrates
the principle that an issue placed on the shelf for too long can
explode. Though it may well go away temporarily, a leader has to
keep track of the issue because it can generate a future crisis. From
a strategic perspective, a tactical decision to avoid an issue or exclude
an interested party on the basis of the holding environment's carrying
capacity often results in a temporary reduction in stress that can lull
people into a false sense of security.
                                                Assassination / 241

   Running that risk may be necessary. But when the adaptive capac-
ity has been increased, and the enterprise successfully addresses its
initial set of problems, a leader must consider reintroducing the
neglected issues. Perhaps had politicians done so more vigorously
and effectively in the first decades of this nation, and before cotton
became so central to the South's economy and social and cultural
life, the Civil War could have been averted. By Abraham Lincoln's
day, the politics of inclusion meant going to war. The Constitution
had no escape clause; differences were supposed to be worked out
within the framework of the union. The South would be included
by force. But leading the nation to meet this challenge represented
such enormous loss that doing so cost Lincoln his life.


                          Pacing the Work
Clearly, challenging people to face harsh realities can be brutal work.
When King and Gandhi asked people to go into the streets at the
risk of getting beaten by police, they made brutal requests. When
Ruckelshaus asked Asarco workers to choose between a way of life
and a case of leukemia per year, he outlined a brutal demand. Asking
Americans to choose between fighting or getting out of Vietnam
would have pushed a brutal outcome, either way, into the body
politic. Any politician in the 1990s who goes home to tell people the
"good news" about the end of the Cold War and its effects on their
jobs and way of life will be asking them to face bittersweet truths.
Telling people to face pain can feel like cruelty, particularly when
one has no answer to give, only questions, perspectives, and some
hard facts.
   The pains of change deserve respect. People can only sustain so
much loss at anyone time. Leadership demands respect for people's
basic need for direction, protection, and order in times of distress.
Leadership requires compassion for the distress of adaptive change,
both because compassion is its own virtue, and because it can im-
prove one's sense of timing. Knowing how hard to push and when
to let up are central to leadership.
   There are numerous methods to pace the work, and we have
already seen them in operation in various contexts. Strengthening
the holding environment indirectly affects pacing because it increases
242   I   STAYING ALIVE

the community's tolerance for stress. Thus, creating a trustworthy
set of relationships, as we saw in the Buchanan and Tacoma cases,
both between authority figures and stakeholders and among emerg-
ing coalitions, increases people's adaptive capacity. Deciding what
issues to focus attention on, how to frame them, and how to manage
the flow of information are all direct mechanisms of pacing. Another
method is to exclude voices representing issues that are too provoca-
tive, such as the voices of slaves in 1787. Finally, choosing the
decisionmaking process provides a means to pace the work because
it determines both the breadth of participation and where the weight
of responsibility falls. An autocratic or consultative process gives less
of the burden to people than a delegative or consensual mode of
operating.
   Thus, the questions one would ask in pacing the work derive from
familiar concerns. First, how stressful is the question or problem
being raised? How much loss does it involve? Second, how resilient
are the people being challenged? Are they accustomed to learning or
are they likely to reach quickly for an avoidance mechanism with
which to restore equilibrium? Third, how strong are the bonds of
authority that give one the power to hold people's attention to
brutally hard questions?
   In each society and organization, people will have different toler-
ances for the stresses of adaptive work, and different situations will
generate different levels and symptoms of distress. Leadership re-
quires knowing the social system well enough to predict how stress-
ful the challenge facing it will be and how capably it will absorb the
stress. If the organization has lived in a stable environment for thirty
years, with a stable authority structure headed by the same person,
an event like a transition in authority may provoke a moderate to
high level of stress. If the transition is sudden, then the stress will be
greater. If the transition has been long in coming and well prepared
for, then the stress will be lower. If a political and economic revolu-
tion, as in Central and Eastern Europe, drastically changes the op-
erating environment, the stress will be severe. 9
   Leadership operates within particular worlds and requires an ex-
perimental mindset-the willingness to work by trial and error-
where the community's reactions at each stage provide the basis for
planning future actions. Research about each particular context is
                                                 Assassination   /   243

crucially important, but no analysis or catalogue can substitute for
a leader's improvisational skills. Thus, a leader stays alive not by
"playing it safe" but by taking deliberate risks based on his ongoing
assessment of the territory, knowing that corrective action will al-
most always be necessary. He takes the risk of challenging people,
directly or indirectly, slow or fast, soft or hard, guided by his com-
prehension of and sensitivity to the changes people have to make in
their lives as they take account of the questions he raises. As Martin
Luther King Jr. explained to his outraged black constituents, the civil
rights movement needed to have compassion even toward racist
white people. He saw no point in frightening them beyond their limit
of tolerance. Had the movement provoked a rigid posture of defense
against change among whites, it may not have accomplished any
change for blacks. To the degree that unleashing black aspirations
and outrage overwhelmed the nation's adaptive capacity during the
summer riots of those years, the civil rights cause was probably set
back.
   Yet compassion, as King described it, is rarely soft. The respect
required in leadership is often the limit-setting love that gives people
little leeway for turning their eyes from difficult work. But toughness
is not the same thing as the gleeful abuse of power, or vengeful
delight. When Lyndon Johnson challenged his white Southern col-
leagues and constituents to come to terms with civil rights, he had
no interest in humiliating them. His tactics worked because he knew
their defenses and respected them at the same time that he challenged
them.
   In pacing the work, a leader has to take account of the strength
of his hold on people's attention and commitments. If he has author-
ity in the social system, then he has some leverage over the holding
environment. He can reduce the distress by being an authoritative
and hopeful presence, providing clear direction and protection, ori-
enting people with the reasons for undergoing hardship, adding
internal structures, controlling conflict, and framing the debate in
less challenging ways. Conversely, he elevates distress when he puts
pressure on stakeholders, unleashes conflict, includes provocative
voices, and frames the debate more starkly. Thus, a leader must
monitor repeatedly his own informal authority in the community as
it fluctuates. With a strong hold, he can generate more productive
244   I   STAYING ALIVE

stress and move faster. With a weak hold, he has to move more
slowly.
   For example, Lyndon Johnson may have had enough informal
authority before and after the election of 1964 to use a more chal-
lenging frontal approach to the nation on the issue of Vietnam.
William Ruckelshaus returned to the EPA in 1983 in the role of
savior, which gave him enough informal authority to run the Tacoma
experiment in public deliberation. Barbara Parsons drew upon a
ten-year relationship with the Buchanan family when she began to
hold their attention to the adaptive work facing them. And Corazon
Aquino, with an extraordinary public mandate, might have had
enough leverage initially to reform the Philippine elite rather than
primarily challenge the vestiges of Marcos.
   In contrast, when a leader has little or no authority in the system,
she can only control the severity of her challenge. She cannot contain
the distress by structuring the process, corralling stakeholders into a
meeting, or issuing calming statements. Civil rights strategists, for
example, ratcheted up the stress they generated as the society seemed
to move and respond to their efforts. They did not take on the more
disturbing issue of voting rights first; they took on access to educa-
tion and the freedom to ride in public buses without discrimination.
Only after the nation had tackled those problems and several others,
and had become familiar with challenges such as these, did the civil
rights movement directly confront the distribution of political power.
   A leader must take the risk of action when the appropriate level
and duration of distress are uncertain. Even the pacing must be
improvised. Will nations like Poland, Russia, and China, for exam-
ple, learn better by sustaining severe pain for a short time, or mod-
erate pain over a longer time?lO When Watts began to burn in August
of 1965, weeks after passage of the Voting Rights Act, Johnson, as
Califano describes it, "was forced to face the fact that he might be
losing his race against the ticking clock of expectations that the
promise of his own legislative achievements and rhetoric had wound
up. "11
   Unlike rote learning situations in which the answer is supplied,
though paced, by the teacher, adaptive learning situations demand
that people discover, invent, and take responsibility. Leadership is a
special sort of educating in which the teacher raises problems, ques-
tions, options, interpretations, and perspectives, often without an-
                                                Assassination / 245

swers, gauging all the while when to push through and when to hold
steady.
   Socrates illustrates this kind of teaching and the pitfall of pacing
the work too quickly. Socrates challenged people in the marketplace,
asking questions of those who thought they had wisdom. He edu-
cated through inquiry, and he upset people. As far as we know from
his pupil Plato, Socrates aimed his questions at the blindspots of his
community. He did not presume to have the answers or to have a
fix on the truth. But he also did not assume that people had broad
wisdom or knowledge simply because they were considered experts
in one specialized field. A skilled physician might know little about
emotional matters of the heart. Socrates, in his irreverence for cer-
tainty in a world that craved it, challenged people to live with doubt.
   In 399 B.C., an Athenian jury of 501, by a margin of 30, convicted
him of corrupting Athenian children through his teachings. The jury
then sentenced Socrates to death by poison. 12 Could Socrates have
succeeded in his task without causing his own demise? Perhaps.
According to Plato's dramatization at least, Socrates had enormous
respect for argument and logical inquiry, but he seems to have had
less respect for the normal human defenses, emotional defenses, that
protect the equilibrium people try so hard to create in their organi-
zations and systems of belief. Socrates paced his challenge less on the
basis of what his opponents could digest emotionally than on the
basis of how quickly logic could carry him in the argument. 13 If the
logical connections of the argument were long and tedious, then so
would be the pace of the discussion. If Socrates could make the
connections more quickly, then the argument would move swiftly.
   As a model of leadership, this neglects human truths. The learning
required to accomplish adaptive work is not simply conceptual.
Logical argument is rarely sufficient. Sifting through the old and
fashioning something new takes emotional work. To move at the
pace of logic alone, people would need an unusually high level of
rationality and intellectual freedom from habit, tradition, and pride.
The leader as educator has to engage the parties in a process of
inquiry that accounts for their fear or pain, if learning is to be
produced. By not pacing his presentation to the comprehension of
his audience, Socrates encouraged people to focus attention on him
rather than on the questions he posed.
   Again, Johnson put it succinctly: "Congress is like a whiskey
246   I   STAYING ALIVE

drinker. You can put an awful lot of whiskey into a man if you just
let him sip it. But if you try to force the whole bottle down his throat
at one time, he'll throw it up." Johnson the legislator understood the
principle, but, tragically, Johnson the President set the pace less by
the nation's adaptability than by his own urgent drive to accomplish
so much. Limitless aspiration, unleashed by gaining the presidency,
ran wild. As Califano describes: "His own singular capacity to enact
so many laws and programs led him to overestimate the capacity of
the government to administer and the nation to absorb so much so
fast. "14


                   The Temptation of Martyrdom
In exercising leadership, people often are drawn to taking coura-
geous stands. Indeed, leadership may require the willingness to die.
Sometimes, however, people confuse courage with the temptation of
martyrdom. Martyrdom may promise permanence for one's words,
or one may imagine that steadfastness will inspire following genera-
tions. In particular, martyrdom has a powerful allure for people with
grand aspirations invested with the dreams and suffering of others,
particularly when facing unyielding resistance and when previous
hard-won gains slip away.
   Martyrdom does not arise from the nature of the martyr's person
or acts alone. It derives from the meaning people give to him and
his acts. Martyrdom is a role created by the community. Thus, heroes
who die in a dangerous enterprise may not become martyrs. Millions
of soldiers have died heroically in wars for their nation but are not
normally called martyrs. The people for whom they have died create
no such role for them. Contrary to common usage, an individual
cannot "martyr" himself, even though he sacrifices his life, unless
the group makes him into a martyr. Most commonly, martyrdom is
a role reserved for charismatic authorities who are assassinated in
the service of their cause.
   As we have seen, communities generate charismatic authority dur-
ing times of distress when people search desperately for someone to
relieve their pains. A powerful authorizing relationship, often left
informal, results when an individual steps forward with great prom-
ise. The charisma derives not only from the person's skills, person-
                                                Assassination I 247

ality, and devotion but also from the community's investment. As in
Hollywood, the star steps into a role that the audience has made.
Until people's unrealized dreams and aches attach to the aspiring
actress, she is merely another talented individual with private
hopes. ls
   The long-term challenge of leadership is to develop people's adap-
tive capacity for tackling an ongoing stream of hard problems. The
point is not to foster dependency but to counteract the inappropriate
dependency on authority that distress tends to produce in adaptive
situations. Yet in the actual exercise of leadership, dependency must
wax and wane. People need to rest the weight of their burden on
someone's shoulders. How many of us manage without the hope of
being protected or rescued in times of distress? Leadership requires
carrying that burden, containing the distress, for a time, sometimes
a long time, while people adapt sufficiently to take it back.
   Particularly at the early stages of an adaptive process, charismatic
authority is a very great resource for leadership. Witness Roosevelt
at the start of his presidency, Churchill at the start of the war, or
King during the civil rights movement. Charisma can provide a very
strong hold over people's attention while they undergo a period of
sustained distress, mobilization, creativity, and change.
   The pitfall of charisma, however, is unresolved dependency. People
can fail to move on, to discover their own "magic," their own
capacity for responsibility. They may not grow to realize their capa-
bility for self-governance. Rather than establish new norms, under-
standings, and authorizing structures, they may focus their sights and
energies on the single charismatic individual. No one else can com-
pare to him. The charismatic and his constituents develop a relation-
ship in which promises insulate against the distress of facing
problems. For the charismatic, it feels good to be idealized. For his
constituents, it feels good to have someone who assures deliverance
in the long-run, and in the short-run provides direction, protection,
orientation, the control of conflict, and clear norms. 16
   Sometimes for a long period of time, these charismatic bonds may
be all that hold a community together in its effort to face major
change. If no charismatic emerges, people may be truly bereft and
lost in a sea of forces and pressures beyond their adaptive capacity.
The society may die. If someone does emerge, the people may un-
248   /   STAYING ALIVE

derstandably attribute his rise to "divine grace." Indeed, if he exer-
cises leadership, he may well save his community and help it to renew
itself. First, he binds people together by powerfully articulating their
values, hopes, and pains. Second, he weaves these hopes into some
image of the future. And third, he provides energy, strategy, and faith
that the vision can be realized. In mobilizing his community, his
confidence and strength fosters a necessary dependency that only
over time can be dismantled. Yet to sustain adaptive change, the
community has eventually to discover and develop its own capacity
for doing work, including the capacity to authorize other citizens
without expecting magic.
   What happens, then, when the charismatic authority is murdered?
Sometimes the martyr can serve as a model, a continuing source of
inspiration, cemented in memory by the price he paid. But it may
also be that the process of developing self-governing capability stops,
perhaps for a long time. We hear from the bereaved, "If only he were
still alive!" as if the adaptive strength of a community depended
fundamentally on one individual. The charismatic may be held in
place for perpetuity while the act of murder itself takes on a magical
aura, drawing people to its scene for generations to renew the con-
nection. 17 Thus, in 1991 the Civil Rights Museum opened its doors
on the site of King's assassination. Or people may await the return
of the martyr in a future incarnation. The event of his death may
come to mean more than his life.
   Martyrdom can keep people hanging on. If one's aim is to immor-
talize oneself in the memory and culture of a community, then
martyrdom is the right strategy. But martyrdom can entrap the
people who need to be mobilized. Living words become rigid canon.
And therein lies its potential futility. Over time, a leader has to help
people let go. When a charismatic authority is killed, that process of
letting go may stop.
   The personal temptation to martyrdom becomes particularly
strong when the problem comes into its full complexity, swamping
the capacity of the charismatic to maintain the illusion that he has
the answers. At that moment, the wish to escape the torment pro-
duced by carrying people's aspirations, but not being able to fulfill
them, grows. Years of fatigue add to the wish. Yet the option of
simply stepping down, passing the mantle, goes against the grain
                                                Assassination I 249

both of the charismatic's own grandiosity and the group's clinging
dependency.
    Martin Luther King Jr. sensed his death and referred to it in a
speech the night before his assassination in 1968. Ironically, he had
wanted that year to take a sabbatical. He felt a despondency pro-
duced by doubts about the efficacy of the civil rights movement,
violent rioting that he could not control, sharpening divisions within
the black community, and diminishing national attention. But he felt
constrained by the dependency of his constituents, who expected him
to continue bearing the cross. Andrew Young and Coretta Scott King
called the idea of a sabbatical "impossible." As King's biographer
David Garrow put it, "The role in which he was caught up would
not allow him to jettison the responsibility that lay on his shoul-
ders."18 Yet giving in to these pressures may have been a mistake,
not only because it led to his death but also because it discouraged
self-reliance in the community. If King had viewed himself as a
barometer of these pressures, his despondency may have provided
valid evidence suggesting that the dependency had grown too
strong-and felt overwhelming-and he needed to make room for
others. A long sabbatical might have been a very useful tactic. King
might have said: "I've had enough. I've taken you as far as I know
how. We've gone far together, but there is much farther to go. We
have many gifted leaders, so I'm going home for a good while. The
rest is up to you."
                               11
           The Personal Challenge


Why is it lonely on the point? Because those who lead take respon-
sibility for the holding environment of the enterprise. They them-
selves are not expected to be held. They do the holding, often quite
alone. They run the risks of moral regret. Max Weber described this
ethic of responsibility at the conclusion of World War I in a speech
at Munich University: "It is immensely moving when a mature
man-no matter whether old or young in years-is aware of a
responsibility for the consequences of his conduct and really feels
such responsibility with heart and soul. He then acts by following
an ethic of responsibility and somewhere he reaches the point where
he says: 'Here I stand; I can do no other.'''1
   Yet the ethic of responsibility frequently goes awry. Years ago,
soon after medical school, I worked as a physician examining top
corporate executives in an elegant medical clinic in New York City.
As part of their benefits package, these executives were given an
annual medical exam; and I was one of the six or seven doctors on
staff. Not surprisingly, more than half of the hundreds of people I
examined seemed burdened by the stresses they were carrying. Stress
manifested itself in various ways, from habitual smoking and drink-
ing to ulcers, heart disease, bad nutrition, and family problems. Why
were they stressed? For the most part, these people carried the weight
of other people's worries, frustrations, and desires. They were not
allowed to have their own crises of confidence; they were supposed
to know what they were doing. They nearly always hid their fears
                                 250
                                      The Personal Challenge    I 251

from others and quite often from themselves. They tended to have
little insight into their own investment in carrying the load, although
in the confidence of a doctor's office they often began to disclose the
burden. Indeed, they talked readily, which indicated the pent-up
urgency of their misgivings. But they did not talk outside. The
boundaries between their colleagues (members of the board, senior
staff, top management) and them were nearly impermeable to emo-
tions of doubt. 2
   The myth of leadership is the myth of the lone warrior: the solitary
individual whose heroism and brilliance enable him to lead the way.
This notion reinforces the isolation. From the perspective of the
individual who leads with authority, constituents confer power in
exchange for being relieved of problems. If he shows reluctance or
weakness in shouldering the burden, they will often feel betrayed,
and he will be diminished in their eyes. When President Carter
collapsed from heat exhaustion while running a race the month
following his "malaise" speech, the visual images broadcast nation-
wide reinforced many people's suspicions that Carter was in-
sufficiently in control of public affairs. When President Bush fell ill
at dinner at the climax of his 1991 trip to Japan, he felt quite a bit
of pressure to convey an image of strength and resilience the follow-
ing day, even though everybody else with the flu that season seemed
to stay in bed for a week. 3 And if, as some physicians suspected, it
was not the flu but a fainting spell, could the President say so? When
President Reagan was shot in the chest in 1981, his poise and good
humor both before and after surgery not only calmed a nation that
cared but gave people the image of spunk that they wanted. During
the crippling depression of the 1930s, Franklin Roosevelt's mastery
of polio symbolized the recovery and vigor the nation craved.
   The strategic challenge is to give the work back to people without
abandoning them. Overload them and they will avoid learning. Un-
derload them and they will grow too dependent, or complacent.
Thus, an authority has to bear the weight of problems, for a time.
That is a very real burden. Unloading that weight on people unpre-
pared to respond would be negligent. Shouldering the pains and
uncertainties of an institution particularly in times of distress comes
with the job of authority. It can only be avoided at the institution's
peril.
252   I   STAYING ALIVE


   Those who lead without authority also must bear a heavy weight.
While authority figures become repositories of hope by virtue of
taking office, people who lead without authority shoulder what they
perceive as the needs and opportunities of a community because they
take personal responsibility for framing hard questions about pur-
poses and possibilities. Identifying themselves with those questions,
they often invest their own love, pain, and outrage. Their lives would
be less stressful if they did not care. Then, as they build a constitu-
ency and become known, they gain informal and sometimes formal
authority and begin to carry other people's aspirations and passions
as well. As they begin to disturb people beyond the bounds of their
sympathetic constituency, they generate stress in the larger system.
They have to stomach the repercussions of that distress at the same
time that they provoke it. They cannot expect to be properly valued
by the authorities in the system they challenge, at least not in the
short-term. They cannot expect to be held.
   To lead and yet sustain the personal stresses that come with
leading requires inner discipline. So far, we have focused on a strat-
egy for managing the social environment. In concluding our study,
we briefly address the equally critical capacity to manage oneself.
What follows, then, are seven practical suggestions for bearing the
responsibility that comes with leadership without losing one's effec-
tiveness or collapsing under the strain. They are: (1) get on the
balcony, (2) distinguish self from role, (3) externalize the conflict,
(4) use partners, (5) listen, using oneself as data, (6) find a sanctuary,
and (7) preserve a sense of purpose. 4


                        Getting on the Balcony
Leadership is both active and reflective. One has to alternate between
participating and observing. Walt Whitman described it as being
"both in and out of the game." For example, Magic Johnson's
greatness in leading his basketball team came in part from his ability
to play hard while keeping in mind the whole game situation, as if
he stood in the stands. Bobby Orr played hockey in the same way.s
  Although the principle may be easy to grasp, the practice is not.
Rather than maintain perspective on the events that surround and
involve us, we often get swept up by them. Consider the experience
                                     The Personal Challenge   I 253

of dancing on a dance floor in contrast with standing on a balcony
and watching other people dance. Engaged in the dance, it is nearly
impossible to get a sense of the patterns made by everyone on the
floor. Motion makes observation difficult. Indeed, we often get car-
ried away by the dance. Our attention is captured by the music, our
partner, and the need to sense the dancing space of others nearby to
stay off their toes. To discern the larger patterns on the dance
floor-to see who is dancing with whom, in what groups, in what
location, and who is sitting out which kind of dance-we have to
stop moving and get to the balcony.
   What allowed Lyndon Johnson to manage the crisis in Selma
successfully was his ability to get to the balcony. He understood
intimately what the crisis was about. He maintained perspective on
the dynamics of the social system as it contended with a tough issue.
He recognized efforts to seduce him, the central authority, into sup-
plying a quick fix, and he knew by virtue of his experience that the
demand for an authoritative solution was a trap. Mobilizing the
national guard in Alabama would have let Wallace and the nation
escape from responsibility. The balcony enabled Johnson to interpret
the trends that would otherwise have swept him away.
   But in waging the Vietnam War, Johnson got caught up in the
unfamiliar dance of foreign policy and never got to the balcony.
Besieged by expectations-his own, Washington's, and the American
public's-Johnson engaged in the nation's conflict without ever lead-
ing it. Instead, he managed the substantive and politically technical
problems of making war. Johnson seemed to lack a conscious phi-
losophy of leadership-a set of clearly articulated guiding principles
and questions. When he succeeded on civil rights, he succeeded by
virtue of experience turned political instinct. When his experience
failed him, as it did in Vietnam, he seemed to have no method of
gaining perspective. In the absence of familiar reference points, and
without a framework of principles and questions, his instincts led
him astray.
   How can one get to the balcony, particularly in an unfamiliar
situation, when fast music is sweeping everyone up in the dance?
Although no framework can substitute for the kind of intimate
knowledge that Johnson had of southern politics, the right questions
can help one get far enough above the fray to see the key patterns.
254 /   STAYING ALIVE

The following diagnostic framework summarizes the reasoning be-
hind the strategic principles of leadership we have explored: identi-
fying the adaptive challenge, regulating distress, directing disciplined
attention to the issues, and giving the work back to people.

Identifying the Adaptive Challenge. As we have seen, an adaptive
challenge consists of a gap between the shared value.s people hold
and the reality of their lives, or of a conflict among people in a
community over values or strategy. In both cases, these internal
contradictions are likely to generate distress. Thus, we can offer the
diagnostic principle that distress itself, if it cannot be alleviated
through the application of technical know-how and existing proce-
dures, provides a clue to what the adaptive challenge is. Although
some people might suggest that ~istress may in some situations be
more a matter of perception than of reality, as Fred Reese and his
colleagues discovered in mobilizing the fearful black middle class in
Selma, the testing and changing of perceptions is often at the heart
of adaptive change.
  The problem causing the distress frequently will not be on the
surface. Although the superficial conflict may be over procedures,
power, schedule, structure, and lines of authority, these seemingly
technical issues often act as proxies for underlying conflicts in ways
of life. The conflict between George Wallace and Lyndon Johnson
over the Constitutional question of states' rights, for example, rep-
resented a fundamental conflict over sharply competing images of
the American community and its values.
  This idea reverses the more common notion that substantive issues
are really proxies for conflicts over power. Frequently, when we see
two people butting heads, we interpret the conflict as a personal
power struggle and lose sight of the perspectives each represents on
the issues. 6 Although gaining advantage in a power conflict may
motivate some individuals to take particular stands on an issue, from
a systems view, a person's power interests can only be realized if he
represents the sentiments and perspectives of a faction in the com-
munity. As a diagnostic matter, that an individual sees personal
advantage in espousing a particular substantive point of view indi-
cates support in the community for that point of view. Thus, diag-
nosing a conflict in terms primarily of power stakes among
                                       The Personal Challenge    /   255

individuals will miss the underlying issue conflict among factions in
the community.
   In meeting with Wallace in the oval office, Johnson appreciated
keenly the interests Wallace represented for his local constituents, as
well as the values of the larger American constituency for which
Wallace might wish to speak, given his national political ambitions,
in the near future. Negotiating over power required knowing the
issue dynamics in the community that underlay personal interest.
   Undoubtedly, a person's individual personality shapes enormously
his actions. Yet, as with power motives, individual actions themselves
are shaped powerfully by the social context and its pressures and
incentives. Indeed, personality diagnoses in general have little prac-
tical value unless one also identifies the issues that person represents
in his organizational role and the forces acting on him as a result.
Jumping to personality explanations, like jumping to power expla-
nations, will often overlook the systemic causes of the problem.
   For example, I have frequently heard the diagnosis, "The problem
is that Jack is burned out," or "The problem is that Jack is drinking
too much"; yet those who make these off-the-cuff assessments fre-
quently do not analyze the organizational stresses that accentuate
Jack's exhaustion or drinking. What stresses does he incur because
of the role he plays and the perspective he represents on difficult
issues in the organization? Jack's behavior is often a symptom not
only of the stresses in his personal life but also of systemic problems
in the enterprise.
   Building on the principle that people represent issues, that inter-
personal conflicts among people with formal or informal authority
represent issue conflicts among their constituents, we can further
propose that problems in working effectively within an organization
will often mirror the problems in the larger community that the
organization aims to solve. Internal rivalries, misunderstandings, and
patterns of disrespect will mimic patterns in the social environment.
It is as if the doctor takes on the problems of the patient. Thus, at
Harvard University, for example, each professional school unwit-
tingly takes on the strengths and weaknesses of the professional
community it aims to improve. The organizational dynamics within
the Business School look similar to those of the business community,
the resolution of disputes within the Law School mimic those of the
256   I   STAYING ALIVE

legal profession, and so forth for the schools of divinity, education,
design, medicine, public health, and government. The success of
these schools in improving their professions is largely contingent on
their capacity to take notice and correct for these patterns rather
than fall prey to repetition.
   The mechanism of repetition in any organization is somewhat
straightforward. Members either informally identify with or explic-
itly represent a faction of the community outside. In part, these
personal identifications may have been what drew them initially to
a job in their organization. 7 As well, working in the organization
over time elicits each member's own predilection to identify with
some aspects of the issues and not others, some factions in the
external environment and not others. Resonating with an outside
faction's particular perspective, each member then imports it into the
organization. 8 As a consequence, the maladaptive patterns of behav-
ior inside may derive from work issues and work avoidances outside.
The organization will dramatize the external dynamics often quite
unwittingly.
   This mirroring, inexact as it might be, provides diagnostic clues
for comprehending the dysfunctions and impediments in the outside
community that the organization needs to address. Indeed, if one can
get on the balcony instead of getting caught up in recreating the
problem internally, one can seize the opportunity of using the or-
ganization as a case in point-a laboratory-for identifying chal-
lenges and inventing options for taking action outside, which was
the organization's original aim. 9 Consider the following story.
    When Kevin Jackson, a junior at Yale, was invited to represent
his college at the annual conference of the Council on Higher Edu-
cation in America, he felt honored and full of anticipation. 10 Jackson,
a black youth from Harlem, was the star of his family. No one in
the family had graduated from college before, and they were all
extremely proud of his success. When he left for the conference, held
that year in California, he felt everything was going his way. But by
the time the conference ended he felt so battered that he experienced
crushing headaches even at the memory of the conference for years
afterward.
   The conference was divided into work groups with separate as-
signments due by the end of the four-day gathering. Jackson's group
                                      The Personal Challenge    /   257

was supposed to examine a variety of issues, including affirmative
action. For the first three days everything went smoothly in Jackson's
group; in fact he once again took up his "star" role. The designated
chair was a black woman, but Jackson quickly gained informal
authority for directing the discussion. Although he felt some tension
developing within the group, he disregarded its importance. On the
fourth and final working day, however, a severe confrontation devel-
oped between three white students and him. The topic of discussion
had finally turned to affirmative action, and Jackson was the only
student voicing support for it. The confrontation began on an intel-
lectuallevel, gradually became less intellectual, and ultimately degen-
erated into personal attacks. Jackson finally fled the scene.
   In his bruised state of mind Jackson concluded that he had been
the victim of a racially motivated committee-room lynching. Over
time, however, he began to acknowledge that there had been other
people in the room, including some black students. Jackson had to
wonder why the rest of the group, including the black members, had,
in effect, colluded in what had happened to him.
   In retrospect, Jackson realized that as the informal authority in
the group, he had become the lightning rod for the tensions that built
up. What were these tensions? To Jackson, the group seemed par-
ticularly passive in letting him define the agenda. Jackson, for his
part, misinterpreted the passivity as a vote of confidence. He had not
probed for the origins of the long silences at the beginning of the
meetings. Perhaps the members of the group were ambivalent about
letting Jackson playa dominant role but felt they could not challenge
a black man.
   These tensions may not have surfaced had the group not been
assigned the special task of discussing affirmative action. But given
that task, the group apparently turned Jackson into a personal em-
bodiment of the issue: Did Jackson merit being at Yale, or leading
the group's discussion? Rather than diagnose the difficulties of ad-
dressing affirmative action in a racially mixed society, the group
dramatized them. No one had the presence of mind to analyze and
use the tensions. Instead, they let Jackson take the heat and suffer
the conflict over the issue.
   A more experienced Jackson might have observed from the bal-
cony that both the conference staff and his own reticent group had
258   I   STAYING ALIVE

selected black authority figures, and now the group was erupting on
the issue of affirmative action. Perhaps the staff and the group had
acted out their own form of affirmative action by their choices, or
were concerned about the perception that they had done so. Rather
than take it personally, Jackson might have interpreted the "lynch-
ing" as a sign of how taxing both the group and the society found
it to work this issue. He might have provided a context for their
difficulties by suggesting that the group learn from its own conflict
in order to capture lessons about the dynamics of the issue in the
larger society.ll For example, he might have said, "Hey, wait a
minute. Some of us are getting very passionate about this issue and
for good reason: we care a lot about the values at stake. Each of us
is a living example of these values. We take pride in our individual
accomplishments, while we also care about social justice. Obviously,
we're not going to do anybody any good to repeat in here the
problem the nation has had in working this conflict. What can we
learn from our own struggle discussing the issue? What recomen-
dations might we make not only about the substance of the issue of
affirmative action, but also about the impediments people face in
working the issue and the process they might use to do it better?"
   Our analysis of Jackson's case illustrates these various diagnostic
principles at work. We can distill them into a set of basic questions
for gaining a balcony perspective:
 1. What's causing the distress?
 2. What internal contradictions does the distress represent?
 3. What are the histories of these contradictions?
 4. What perspectives and interests have I and others come to
    represent to various segments of the community that are now
    in conflict?
 5. In what ways are we in the organization or working group
    mirroring the problem dynamics in the community?


Regulating Distress. We have explored the principle that the distress
generated by an adaptive challenge must be contained within limits
in order to produce progress, and I have described the holding
environment as a vessel within which people facing adaptive work
can accomplish the necessary learning. The containing vessel is made
up of various sorts of glue: an authority structure, shared purposes,
                                       The Personal Challenge / 259

common identifications, civic associations, trustworthy institutions,
and other bonds of community. As we have seen in the early 1990s,
particularly in the former Soviet bloc, when high levels of distress
overwhelm the sources of cohesion, people often attempt to restore
a semblance of personal and social equilibrium by narrowing their
affiliation to a smaller but more certain identity group faction and
fighting for resources with other newly bolstered factions as the
society as a whole breaks apart. Clearly, this is not all bad. Progress
by anybody's account may sometimes take the form of divorce. Such
was the American Declaration of Independence from England. How-
ever, disintegrative forces can also lead to chronic chaos and en-
trenched, self-perpetuating conflict and trauma, as well as the death
or stagnation of a community or institution.
   Thus, of vital importance in mobilizing people to meet an adaptive
challenge is the job of regulating, to the extent possible, the level of
disequilibrium. From an authority position, this will mean using the
powers and influence given formally and accrued informally to stra-
tegically frame the issues, orchestrate conflict, develop structures and
processes, provide a measure of orientation and protection, and
maintain those norms that should endure. In short, one has to pace
the work. Operating without authority, one has to gauge when and
how hard to press people to pay attention to issues they might
otherwise avoid.
   Every community and culture will have its own particular sources
of cohesion and limits of tolerance for productive distress, and each
will have its own distinctive methods of modulating distress and
restoring equilibrium. Thus, to keep people within a productive
discomfort zone, one clearly has to know the local symptoms of
distress and the local habits of response. One must know the local
history of problem-solving.
   To identify the tolerable range of distress and discern how to
regulate its level within a particular setting, we add a further set of
questions to the framework:
  6. What are the characteristic responses of the community to
     disequilibrium-to confusion about future direction, the pres-
     ence of an external threat, disorientation in regard to role rela-
     tionships, internal conflict, or the breaking up of norms?
  7. When in the past has the distress appeared to reach a break-
260   /   STAYING ALIVE


     ing point-where the social system began to engage in self-de-
     structive behavior, like civil war or political assassination?
  8. What actions by senior authorities traditionally have restored
     equilibrium? What mechanisms to regulate distress are cur-
     rently within my control, given my authority?

Directing Disciplined Attention to the Issues. We have examined
the principle that social systems frequently try to restore equilibrium
by reducing the overt manifestations of their internal tensions. In-
itially, they will try to apply their current problem-solving methods.
When these do not seem to work and the disequilibrium persists,
the system often will use work avoidance mechanisms to reduce
generalized distress. The work avoidance, if effective, diverts atten-
tion enough to make people forget temporarily about the real prob-
lems that gave rise to the disequilibrium in the first place.
   Thus, a key diagnostic task from the balcony is to identify patterns
of work avoidance so that, when resuming action, one can redirect
attention to the issues. In so doing, it is useful to assume that people's
efforts to restore equilibrium at the cost of facing hard problems are
often not conscious or deliberate. Often, they are convenient misdi-
agnoses of the situation. For example, when people say to them-
selves, "If only we had the right leader our problems would be
solved," they are not intending to avoid work. They often believe
that statement because it fits their way of understanding the cause
of problems. 12
   Moreover, if we propose that work avoidance and destructive
conflict are symptoms of people contending, however ineffectively,
with an adaptive challenge, then the task is both to counteract these
behaviors at the same time that one affirms the significance of the
issues and stakes. For example, instead of saying, "We are avoiding
the issues here," which would annoy people to no end, one might
say, "We are working, perhaps too indirectly, on a difficult issue; let's
address it more directly," which affirms the effort.
   If work avoidance is symptomatic of an adaptive challenge, then
work avoidance patterns can provide clues to the work issue itself.
When a leopard moves through the forest after a rain, a biologist
can spot its trail more easily than she can spot the leopard. Similarly,
when work avoidance takes the form of scapegoating, for example,
the faction or person being scapegoated provides clues about the
                                      The Personal Challenge I 261

work issue. The question is: What distressing perspective does the
faction or person represent in the organization?!3
   Furthermore, we have proposed that authority figures are barome-
ters, that they too provide clues to the issues. If one can use them as
data, or use one's own reactions to situations as data when in the
authority position, then the actions of an authority figure, even in
work avoidance, may indicate the intensity and the nature of the
issues causing distress. For example, in a meeting one might ask
oneself what issue was on the table when the authority figure stepped
in and stifled someone's report, or halted the conversation by calling
a break before the set time?
   Just as every community and culture will have its own distinctive
responses to distress, so also will it have its own patterns of work
avoidance. Some will be more inclined to externalize the enemy,
while others may tend to perpetually reorganize in the hope of a
structural fix, blame authority, scapegoat, or the like. Obviously, one
has to become familiar with the specific patterns by which a com-
munity sacrifices problem-solving to restore equilibrium.
   The dance within organizations and communities is made more
complex because there are usually several adaptive problems at once
challenging the system. It is as if several bands were playing dance
music at the same time. Consequently, another key diagnostic task
is to distinguish ripe from unripe issues. Each requires a different
strategy. Ripe issues have already galvanized attention and generated
urgency in a critical proportion of the community. The challenge then
is to keep attention focused on the dimensions of the problem re-
quiring adaptive work by the interested parties. An unripe issue,
however, usually captures the attention of a small minority in the
community, and the task for them is to draw attention to the issue,
often in the face of resistance by the larger community having other
concerns. We have seen the process of ripening play out in the case
of voting rights.
   In order to identify the issues that need attending and to counter-
act patterns of work avoidance, we ask the following additional
questions:
   9. What are the work and work avoidance patterns particular
      to this community?
  10. What does the current pattern of work avoidance indicate
262   I   STAYING ALIVE

      about the nature and difficulty of the present adaptive chal-
      lenge and the various work issues that it comprises?
  11. What clues do the authority figures provide?
  12. Which of these issues are ripe? What are the options for
      tackling the ripe issues, or for ripening an issue that has not
      fastened in people's minds?


Giving the Work Back to People. I have proposed that a community
can fail to adapt when its people look too hard to their authorities
to meet challenges that require changes in their own ways. Indeed,
the higher and more persistent distresses accompanying adaptive
problems accentuate the dependency dynamic. And authority figures
often respond by employing or colluding with work avoidances that
shield people from responsibility and pain.
   Thus, what one observes from the balcony has to take into account
one's own placement on the dance floor in terms of formal and
informal authority. One has to assess the pressures that can unwit-
tingly dominate one's behavior. Because leadership will often require
cutting against the grain of expectations, one has to become sharply
aware of what those expectations are in order to set strategy. If one
is in a position of authority, what are the likely seductions? If one is
operating without or beyond authority, what kinds of diversions
might one generate, for example, by engaging in a direct contest with
authority figures or when becoming a lightning rod?
   We have examined the principle that giving the work back to
people frequently takes the form of orchestrating conflict. Adaptive
work often requires the engagement of parties with competing inter-
ests, and in leading the community of interests one has to compre-
hend the stakes and potential losses within it. In essence, identifying
the issues consists of recognizing the kinds of changes that various
people may have to make in order to make joint progress. Develop-
ing a strategy to get them to accomplish change, and perhaps realize
losses or create mutually beneficial solutions, requires knowing with
some intimacy the texture of interests in people's lives.
   In order to identify the relevant parties, the nature of their adap-
tive work, and the pitfalls of shielding them from responsibility, we
ask these questions:
                                      The Personal Challenge / 263

  13. Changes in whose values, beliefs, or behaviors would allow
      progress on these issues?
  14. What are the losses involved?
  15. Given my role, how am I likely to be drawn into work
      avoidance?
   Without undertaking an analysis from the balcony, one becomes
all too quickly a subject of the dance floor. Yet, however important
the balcony may be, it is not a place to retreat. Diagnosis is meant
to enable action. Midcourse assessment enables midcourse correc-
tion. In viewing social processes from the balcony, one becomes
merely a temporary observer before the next round. In practice, this
transition back and forth between analysis and action is no easy task.
It involves skills that often do not come naturally. There are a
number of common human impediments to appreciate. What follows
is a discussion of some of these skills and impediments.


                      The Role/Self Distinction
Exercising leadership and bearing personal responsibility requires
seeing the difference between oneself and one's role. A person who
leads must interpret people's responses to his actions as responses to
the role he plays and the perspective he represents. For example,
most parents know that when their teenage son slams the door in
their faces, he is working on the task of separation that accompanies
growing up. Though they may be upset with his behavior, they will
usually know better than to take it personally. Their son is angry less
with them as individuals than with the role they playas parents.
Indeed, many parents of teenagers face a similar anger, though per-
haps in a different idiom. If the parents do take the anger personally,
their response will likely be off the mark. They may scream back,
sulk, or wall themselves off. Based on a misinterpretation of their
son's behavior (He is angry with us), they will not be able to give
what their son needs next.
   Distinguishing role from self is not a prescription for keeping
emotions-values and passions-at a distance and disingenuously
playing a role. But it enables an individual not to be misled by his
emotions into taking statements and events personally that may have
264   I   STAYING ALIVE

little to do with him. Kevin jackson's reaction to his working group
on affirmative action provides an example. Here is another.
   In October 1962 the world avoided nuclear war in part because
President John F. Kennedy had the capacity to distinguish role from
self during the Cuban missile crisis. When McGeorge Bundy, his
National Security Adviser, first came to him to report that offensive
Soviet missiles had been sighted in Cuba, Kennedy took it personally.
He had repeatedly gone on the record, as recently as one month
before Bundy's report, stating that he would not allow the placement
of offensive weapons in Cuba, and Khrushchev had assured him
repeatedly that no such thing would happen. As a result, Kennedy
felt personally betrayed and personally on the line. With the Bay of
Pigs operation only eighteen months past and Congressional elec-
tions less than a month away, he could ill-afford another foreign
policy fiasco.
   Outraged, Kennedy was immediately inclined to order an air raid
on Cuba to destroy the missiles, and he called on his top advisers to
determine the feasibility of doing just that. 14 But his advisers felt less
personally outraged, and thinking more dispassionately about the
crisis, began to weigh a series of alternatives to an air strike, includ-
ing a quarantine of Soviet ships carrying military equipment to Cuba.
They tried to figure out why Khrushchev had placed the missiles,
and of course no one believed that it had anything to do with
Kennedy as a person. Even if the Soviets had wanted to shame and
embarrass Kennedy, which probably was not the case, that would
have constituted a strategic move given Kennedy's role and not a
personal attack. IS
   During the crisis, Kennedy quickly regained his perspective. In-
deed, as the situation heated up, the ability to distinguish self from
role gave him the psychological flexibility to imagine himself in
Khrushchev's shoes as Premier, which then enabled him to interpret
and respond more realistically to Khrushchev's behavior without
aggravating the crisis. At the peak of tension, Kennedy received two
very different letters, both from Khrushchev, within the span of
twenty-four hours. The first sounded passionate and tormented, yet
sane in its willingness to bargain and yield. The second letter sounded
rigid and official. The contrast produced quite a lot of consternation
among Kennedy's advisers. How should they respond? In sorting it
out, Kennedy, with the insight of his brother Robert, made the
                                       The Personal Challenge / 265

crucial assumption that the second letter was the product of bureau-
cratic politics and pressures on Khrushchev as Premier. Kennedy, as
a politician, knew well about such pressures. On the other hand, he
assumed that the first letter, the passionate one, expressed Khrush-
chev's personal sentiments. So Kennedy chose to ignore the bureau-
cratic letter. He responded to the first in kind, personal in tone and
willing to bargain. And it worked. A deal was struck. The crisis
resolved. 16

                      Externalizing the Conflict
When conflicting criticisms seem to damn whatever one does, the
distinction between role and self can be life saving. 17 Making the
distinction enables one to externalize the conflict, thereby focusing
attention on the issues and giving the conflict back to its rightful
owners. As we have seen, when President Johnson felt he had no
options on Vietnam, he might have proceeded to deliberately exter-
nalize the conflict. Instead, he internalized it, making it his own. At
the small group level, he failed to make sure that his policy advisers
systematically listened to one another. As a result, the arguments
were never hammered out fully before the President. He allowed
more powerful personalities with greater institutional authority to
dominate the rest. 18 At the institutional level, he generated a pseudo-
consensus in Congress by "emergency" passage of the Gulf of
Tonkin Resolution. The lack of debate unwittingly shielded members
of Congress from grappling with the issues facing the nation.
Johnson put the issues beyond their reach; he minimized external
conflict and manipulated acceptance of his personal decisions. At the
national level, the public, not having the facts, could not confront
the realities shaping its destiny. By choosing to make the decisions
and then persuade the nation, Johnson invited people against the war
to focus their dissent on him.
   In contrast, Martin Luther King Jr. externalized the civil rights
conflict. His strategy did not prevent his assassination, but during
his life it kept the public's attention where it belonged. King repeat-
edly reinforced the message that the conflict was not between white
Americans and him, nor even between black and white Americans.
It was a conflict between American values and American reality.
Ruckelshaus did something similar in pushing the environmental
266   I   STAYING ALIVE

conflict back into the communities of Ruston and Tacoma and re-
fusing to base his decision on the technical expertise of the EPA. So
did Sanger when she created allies within authoritative institutions,
like medicine, and provoked conflict among its members on the
medical treatment of women.
   Internalizing the conflict causes serious difficulties. It leads to a
misdiagnosis. The issue readily becomes personalized and gets inter-
preted as a personal problem even when it is not. Furthermore, it
produces work avoidance because it allows people to deflect their
attention from the issue to the person, and to shift responsibility to
him. Moreover, the person taking the heat of a personalized conflict
often feels compelled to react with a personal defense, which can
perpetuate the dynamic.
   When the press began to attack the 1984 vice-presidential candi-
date Geraldine Ferraro for her husband's financial dealings, she in-
ternalized the conflict. Responding with a personal defense, she held
a very lengthy news conference in which she opened all the books
and answered any and all questions. 19 By doing so, she hoped to
put an end to the attacks on her family. But answering detailed
questions raised more questions. The very personal defense gave
the charges heightened interest and revealed further vulnerabilities,
and the stories about her and her husband continued. Yet the on-
slaught was not essentially personal. After all, the media had a
market for reports about her only because she was a candidate. The
attacks were not on the person of the candidate, but on the role she
played.
   In retrospect, one way to interpret her press coverage is to see it
as the handiwork of the media anxious to find any prominent can-
didate guilty of something shameful. The stories might also be
blamed on negative research by the opposition. Yet as we know from
the days of Ronald Reagan's teflon coating, not all mud sticks. When
it does, it suggests there is an audience for it, that people are looking
for reasons to confirm their suspicions. In Ferraro's case, what might
she have seen from the balcony?
   In order to distinguish self from role, Ferraro might have asked:
What challenge do I represent to people that generates enough dis-
comfort in them so that discrediting me generates news interest? The
answer to that question was obvious, above all to her. Ferraro was
a woman seeking the nation's penultimate role of political authority.
                                         The Personal Challenge / 267

That fact posed a major adaptive challenge to men and women
throughout the land.
   Having identified the real problem, Ferraro might have chosen
from a variety of appropriate responses. One kind of response would
have been to redirect attention to the issues. Ferraro might have
engaged people in examining their attitudes toward a woman's role
and point of view. Obviously, this would have been difficult. At every
opportunity, she would have had to deflect the attention focused on
her person and family back onto the underlying questions. "Of
course, our financial books are open for all to see. But that's not the
real issue." The attacks may not have stopped, but she could have
framed the debate so as to give context to her candidacy.
   In essence, the nation placed her in the role of representing a
woman's ability and perspective. She could not escape that role. She
could only internalize or externalize the issue conflicts represented
by that role. For most of the campaign, she did the former, either
defending herself or speaking to the "national" issues (the nuclear
arms race, jobs, education) at arm's length from questions about a
woman's capacity for authority and the particular views on national
issues that she, as a woman, would bring to the White House.
   Only in the final four days of the campaign did Ferraro get behind
"herself," or, more accurately, articulate steadfastly the challenge she
represented in her unique role. In a last-ditch effort to gain women's
votes, she finally spoke directly to the issues she embodied. Instead
of holding them close in, she put them back out into the public arena.
  We can win Olympic gold medals and we can coach our daughters'
  soccer teams. We can walk in space and help our children take their
  first steps. We can negotiate trade agreements and manage family
  budgets. We can be corporate executives and also wives and mothers.
  We can be doctors and also bake cookies with our six-year-old future
  scientists. The choices are unlimited. We can be all these things. But
  we don't have to be any of them ... My candidacy is not just for
  me, it's for everyone. It's not just a symbol. It's a breakthrough. It's
  not just a statement. It's a bond between women all over America.
  My candidacy says America believes in equality. And the time for that
  equality is now. 20
   Thus, externalizing the conflict for Ferraro would have meant two
things: redirecting attention from her person to the issues she repre-
268   I   STAYING ALIVE

sented in the role the public gave her as candidate, and framing the
conflict so that people would understand it not merely as a conflict
between their perspectives and hers but between competing perspec-
tives within the polity. Do women have the capacity to exercise
leadership and authority? Should women work primarily in the
home? What do we mean by equality? Ferraro's task was educative;
to consider her candidacy seriously, Americans clearly needed to
think hard about these questions.
   To educate, Ferraro had to speak in a way that affirmed the
different views even as she questioned them. Martin Luther King Jr.
illustrated this as well. While affirming traditional ideals-freedom
and equality-he questioned their realization. By doing so, he gained
authority in the eyes of those he challenged, which then increased
his capacity to raise questions. Externalizing the conflict enabled him
to keep his hands free to lead the public debate toward a new
synthesis. Ferraro, as we have seen, did this to an extent finally at
campaign's end. She spoke to the American ideals of equality, fair
play, and individual expression; the historic fight against prejudice;
and the fact that women take authority in jobs and families every
day.
   Getting a strategic perspective is critical to staying alive longer. But
how can one distinguish self from role and externalize the conflict
in the midst of the storm, when thrown overboard, threatened by
sharks, and about to go under? One needs partners.

                                Partners
Even if the weight of carrying people's hopes and pains may fall
mainly, for a time, on one person's shoulders, leadership cannot be
exercised alone. The lone-warrior model of leadership is heroic sui-
cide. Each of us has blind spots that require the vision of others.
Each of us has passions that need to be contained by others. Anyone
can lose the capacity to get on the balcony, particularly when the
pressures mount. Every person who leads needs help in distinguish-
ing self from role and identifying the underlying issues that generate
attack. 21
   Partners come in two general types: the confidant and the ally. The
confidant is the person to whom one can cry out and complain. A
                                      The Personal Challenge    I 269

confidant can provide a holding environment for someone who is
busy holding everybody else. People attempting to lead need partners
who can put them back together again at the end of the day. These
partners, often friends, spouses, lovers, or close colleagues, provide
perspective. They help one climb back up to the balcony to under-
stand what has happened. They help ask questions like, "What's
going on here? What's the distress about? What can be learned from
the mistake? What are the options for corrective action?"
   John Kennedy had that kind of partner in his brother Robert. At
the beginning of the Cuban Missile Crisis, Robert got President
Kennedy to pause and reflect by passing him a note: "I know now
how Tojo felt when he was planning Pearl Harbor." Robert had no
interest in seeing his brother go down in history as another Tojo-
acting without warning, and risking the start of war. 22 And when the
two letters arrived from Khrushchev, Robert helped his brother get
to the balcony to view himself from Khrushchev's role.
   The second general type of partner is an ally. The ally is a partner
usually operating across a line of authority or organizational bound-
ary. Although allies will share a value or point of view and will often
confide in each other about specific strategic questions, the presence
of a boundary will limit the information flowing between them. 23
   Alliances operate in at least three basic ways: across different
organizations and, within an organization, from junior authority
looking up and from senior authority looking down. Across different
organizations, one of the allies may have senior, equivalent, or junior
authority, but most significantly the allies have no direct authority
over one another. Their alliance is shaped not by the strong forces
that affect authority relationships within an organizational unit but
by an often more malleable indirect authority relationship defined
by each's standing in his own organization and the relationship
between their organizations. Clearly, these kinds of alliances are very
common in government, between government and political move-
ments and interest groups, and across divisions within large corpo-
rations where shared and overlapping tasks require the engagement
of people in different places. For example, William Ruckelshaus had
allies not only within the EPA but also in industry and the Sierra
Club. On domestic issues, Lyndon Johnson had allies across every
conceivable boundary.
270   I   STAYING ALIVE

   Alliances are not necessarily explicit. Leaders often work across
an authority or organizational boundary covertly because making an
overt alliance might create a diversion from the work at hand. For
example, President Johnson's phone call to Roy Wilkins, encourag-
ing him to start lobbying Congress, was confidential. As a result,
Wilkins had more power with senators and congressmen because
they viewed Wilkins appropriately as a representative of black inter-
ests, without confusing Wilkins's efforts with Johnson's interests.
Johnson could best play his part behind the scenes.
   Forming alliances with various authority figures from a position
of little or no authority played a central role in the strategies of
Gandhi, Sanger, and King. In contrast, Chuck Adams found no way
to push further with his superiors the question of faulty bombs in
Vietnam. A leader from below or outside the authority structure
needs protection, encouragement, and warning. He must seek senior
allies, yet he will unnecessarily feel frustrated and betrayed if he
forgets that the more authoritative ally has to contend with a larger
circle of expectations and pressures.
   As we saw with Johnson in Selma, a leader operating from above
needs allies close to the frontline. People there see challenges that
senior people cannot see. Furthermore, they may have more latitude
for raising hard questions. Moreover, their participation is often
necessary to defining and solving the problem. Not only will they
have information and perspectives that need to be taken into account
for framing the problem, but the solution will often consist of
changes that they must implement.
   Clearly, junior allies may not agree with the perspective of senior
authority. Even when in open disagreement, however, junior allies
can take some of the weight off the senior's back and prevent pre-
mature closure on the issues. From a senior position within an
organization, backing and protecting deviations in the lower ranks
(whether or not one agrees with the deviant position) may keep alive
productive conflict. Indeed, one might deploy a maverick junior to
a committee for such a purpose.
   This is consonant with the principle that those who lead from
senior positions must protect voices of leadership without authority.
Yet, how can a person in authority recognize these voices? I suggest
a counter-intuitive rule of thumb. Because the pressures on authority
                                      The Personal Challenge I 271

are to restore equilibrium, one's emotional impulse will often be to
squash those in the community who raise disturbing questions. Con-
sequently, an authority should protect those whom he wants to
silence. Annoyance is often a signal of opportunity. By restraining
himself and examining the potential value of getting people to ad-
dress the provocative questions being raised, he can look past the
person's style. What perspective does the annoying person represent?
Deviants may be the senior's best sources of leadership.


                  Listening: Using Oneself as Data
Not only is the balcony a psychological vantage point from which
to observe others, it is also a vantage point from which to observe
oneself and the way one listens. To interpret events, a person who
leads needs to understand his own ways of processing and distorting
what he hears. To sustain the stresses of leadership, he needs to know
enough about his own biases to compensate for them. If he reacts
automatically to reject advice when it is given in a way that appears
condescending, for example, he needs to become sufficiently ac-
quainted with that reflex that he can listen and respond flexibly,
according to the needs of the situation. Compensation requires the
inner discipline to step back and test the accuracy of one's own
perceptions and the appropriateness of one's reaction. Listening is a
trial-and-error process of making an interpretation, seeing where it
falls short, and revising it. To listen, one has to live with doubt.
   Learning about the tuning of one's own harpstrings, how one is
inclined to resonate more with certain themes than with others, is
an ongoing process. Even the most intense programs of self-exami-
nation do not provide full self-understanding. More likely, if success-
ful, such a program provides the skills and courage to continue
learning over time. When Socrates described himself, he drew a
crucial distinction between wisdom and a passion for wisdom. Hav-
ing a passion for wisdom surpassed the attainment of wisdom. Cu-
riosity was a virtue. Indeed, he considered only a life of ongoing
examination worth living.
   How do people maintain an adequate level of self-examination?
Though different people may need different methods, two general
principles apply. First, we learn by reflecting on daily actions, suc-
272   /   STAYING ALIVE

cesses and failures, of ourselves and others. In particular, we can
learn from those habits that repeatedly get us into trouble and from
those behaviors that surprise us. They often provide clues to our own
peculiar mesh of internal drives and social forces. We can ask our-
selves, "What drew me to behave inappropriately in this situation?"
Or, "Where did that behavior come from?"24 Second, we can use
partners as a hedge against self-deception. They may be formal
partners hired for the purpose, like a consultant, coach, or therapist.
More often, they will be informal partners who, when permitted to
do the job of debriefing us, can promote reflection because they are
the people to whom we ordinarily can talk openly.
    In adaptive situations, where improvisation is the norm, listening
and intervening go hand in hand. Each action ought to be viewed as
an experiment. Improvisation demands ongoing assessment. In prac-
tice, a person who leads must intervene and then hold steady, listen-
ing for the effects of the intervention. She must move from balcony
to dance floor, back and forth. She has to allow for silence. Holding
steady gives the system time to react to her intervention. It also gives
her time to listen. By listening, she refines her interpretation of events
and takes corrective action. Based on what she hears, she intervenes
again. By this approach, interventions are not simply proposed so-
lutions; interventions are ways to test the waters and gather infor-
mation to refine the strategy.
    If she knows herself, she can listen by using herself as an instru-
ment. As a member of the social system, she inevitably resonates with
various issues, trends, and themes in the community. She can pretend
to be a solo player, but she can never actually become one. By virtue
of taking a role, she becomes subject to social forces and expecta-
tions. At best, she can intermittently transcend the influences by
getting to the balcony.
    Even from the balcony, however, people who lead never really get
an objective picture because they never entirely dispense with the
filters through which they perceive events. Nor can they ever be
entirely free of the community's force field. But they can learn about
their own filters and biases and factor them into their interpretations.
They can then listen to themselves for clues to what may be going
on around them. Resonating with the social system, their own
                                       The Personal Challenge    I 273

thoughts and feelings indicate at once something not only about
themselves but also about the environment. 25
   For example, Carol Lewis, the computer company manager, rou-
tinely felt annoyed whenever a particular person would speak up at
weekly staff meetings. He always spoke too emotionally, and he
seemed to revel in acting and dressing differently. She often felt
compelled to silence him, and for months she did. But upon reflection
she noticed that the longer she silenced him, the more emotionally
and untimely were his outbursts. Furthermore, this person seemed
always to represent a different perspective from the rest of the group.
With some probing during the meetings, she began to see that,
though his perspectives conflicted with the dominant trends in her
department, they were sometimes quite germane to its tasks. Rather
than being a cue to restore equilibrium, her annoyance gradually
became a clue in her search for conflicting perspectives to test against
dominant trends. Getting annoyed signaled the need to listen.
   Similarly, when John Kennedy felt outrage and betrayal at learning
of Soviet missiles in Cuba, his feelings provided a clue to the likely
feelings Americans in general would have when finding out about
them. His strategy had to be responsive to those sentiments in the
community. He would have to express the outrage, through words
and action, strategically and not reactively, given the stakes.


                         Finding a Sanctuary
Listening to oneself requires a place where one can hear oneself
think. Working amidst the cacophony of a multiple-band dance floor,
one needs a sanctuary to restore one's sense of purpose, put issues
in perspective, and regain courage and heart. When serving as the
repository of many conflicting aspirations, a person can lose himself
in the role by failing to distinguish his inner voice from the voices
that clamor for attention outside. Partners can help greatly, as can a
run, a quiet walk, or a prayer to break the spell cast by the frenzy
on the floor. We need sanctuaries.
  To exercise leadership, one has to expect to get swept up in the
music. One has to plan for it and develop scheduled opportunities
that anticipate the need to regain perspective. Just as leadership
274   /   STAYING ALIVE

demands a strategy of mobilizing people, it also requires a strategy
of deploying and restoring one's own spiritual resources.

                   Preserving a Sense of Purpose
Leadership oftentimes is a passionate and consuming activity. People
need inspiration and drive to step out into a void which only later
is recognized as a place of creativity and development. So strong are
the emotions of leadership, they can overwhelm the person who has
not developed a sufficiently broad sense of purpose. We have ana-
lyzed in this study the job of leadership and strategies to surmount
its obstacles and sustain its pains. Yet the practice of leadership
requires, perhaps first and foremost, a sense of purpose-the capac-
ity to find the values that make risk-taking meaningful. That is where
this book began, with an inquiry into the values that orient one who
leads.
    A sense of purpose is not the same as a clearly defined purpose.
A sense of purpose generates defined purposes within any given
context by asking these simple questions: What is the opportunity
now? What should our purpose be? Organizations and societies are
full of well-defined purposes, and these are essential. Defined pur-
poses are the single most important source of orientation in doing
both technical and adaptive work, like a ship's compass heading at
sea. But even more precious than any defined purpose is a sense of
purpose that can enable one to step back and review, perhaps with
doubt, perhaps with delight, the orienting values embedded in any
particular mission.
   Over time, specific purposes may no longer capture current reality
or account for the way values have evolved. For example, the Con-
stitutional value of ensuring domestic tranquility has remained the
same over the course of two-hundred years, but programmatic pur-
poses have changed in light of experiences that have clarified the
application of this value in light of other precious values. Before the
Civil War, ensuring domestic tranquility meant returning escaped
slaves to their owners; in 1957, it meant using federal troops to
integrate the high school in Little Rock.
   These changes are perhaps most apparent these days in business,
where companies with long histories and well-honed purposes face
                                       The Personal Challenge    I 275

markets that no longer support them. Many companies are flocking
to retreat centers to reformulate their purposes which, having been
etched in stone for decades, have lost their vibrancy and relevance.
Somehow, in the previous market environment, a sense of purpose
was lost, only to be regained from hard experience. Instead of main-
taining a spirit of inquiry that, with one eye on the reality of the
market and another on the values of the institution, would generate
ongoing adaptive change, complacency set in.
    Adaptive change becomes a high-risk enterprise, however, when
we postpone it so long that a revolution becomes necessary. Compa-
nies may die instead. Societies may degenerate. One look toward
Russia and its neighbors should make us wary of any firm belief that
adaptive work has to be a discontinuous process. The cases we have
examined here demonstrate how progress can indeed be evolutionary
and incremental. The fulcrum, however, is a sense of purpose that
keeps people asking the question, particularly in times of plenty,
"What's our next adaptive challenge?"
    Preserving a sense of purpose helps one take setbacks and failures
in stride. Leadership requires the courage to face failures daily. Oth-
erwise, one cannot take corrective action. Moreover, a sense of
purpose helps generate the freedom to change venues for leading
when, after repeated trial, one sees no options for further action.
Sometimes one has to give up entirely on an organizational or po-
litical situation. Without the personal freedom to change, however,
the loss of a prized and familiar job and direction can lead to
disorientation and despair. Often, to avoid the loss, we limit our
sights instead and, staying in place, give up leading. The accumula-
tion of wounds narrows our scope. In the short run, a personal
equilibrium is restored, but over time a corrosion of spirit can set in
as people lose the inspiration that comes from setting their lives in
a larger frame. A sense of purpose provides the ongoing capacity to
generate new possibilities.

Leadership takes place every day. It is neither the traits of the few, a
rare event, or a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. In our world, in our
politics and businesses, we face adaptive challenges all the time.
Every time we face a conflict among competing values, or encounter
a gap between our shared values and the way we live, we face the
276   I   STAYING ALIVE

need to learn new ways. When a public official is asked to square
conflicting aspirations, he and his constituents face the need to ques-
tion dearly held assumptions. When an executive sees a solution to
a problem, technical in many respects except that it requires changes
in the attitudes and habits of subordinates, she faces an educative
task. When a subordinate close to the frontline sees a gap between
the objectives he is told to implement and the facts he sees in light
of the organization's purpose, he faces the risks and opportunity of
leading without authority.
   Leadership, seen in this light, requires a learning strategy. A leader
has to engage people in facing the challenge, adjusting their values,
changing perspectives, and developing new habits of behavior. To an
authoritative person who prides himself on his ability to tackle hard
problems, this may come as a rude awakening. But it should also
ease the burden of having to know the answers and bear the uncer-
tainty. To the person who waits to receive either "the vision" to lead
or the coach's call, this may also seem a mixture of good a,nd bad
news. The adaptive demands of our societies require leadership that
takes responsibility without waiting for revelation or request. One
may lead perhaps with no more than a question in hand.
     Notes
Acknowledgments
     Index
                                Notes


                               Introduction
1. According to estimates, the New York City draft riots of 1863 were the
   worst in U.S. history, killing more than 100 people in a city of about one
   million. The 1943 race riots in Detroit were more destructive per capita,
   but less in overall terms. Eric Monkkonen, "The Past and the Riot," The
   Urban History Newsletter, October 1992, p. 13; personal communication,
   Eric Monkonnen, Professor of History, UCLA, February 27, 1993.
2. "2 of 4 Officers Found Guilty in Los Angeles Beating: Tension Eases as
   Residents Hail the Verdict," The New York Times, April 18, 1993, p. Al.
3. As Bush put it, "What we saw last night and the night before in Los
   Angeles is not about civil rights. It's not about the great cause of equality
   that all Americans must uphold. It's not a message of protest. It's been the
   brutality of mob, pure and simple." "Excerpts from Bush's Speech on Los
   Angeles Riots: 'Need to Restore Order,'" The New York Times, May 2,
   1992, p. A8;also see Robert Dallek, "Post-Riot Rhetoric Has a 60's Ring:
   Now, as Then, There's No Instant, Cure-all," The Boston Globe, May 10,
   1992, p. 73.
4. Richard Leakey and Roger Lewin, Origins: What New Discoveries Reveal
   about the Emergence of Our Species and Its Possible Future (New York:
   Dutton, 1982).
5. Personal communication, Nicholas Brady, November 17, 1992.
6. These kinds of silence are not formal categories in music. I offer these
   merely as examples.
7. Plato, The Republic, trans. Cornford (New York: Oxford University Press,
   1941), p. 240.
8. For a discussion of the importance and difficulties of generating practical

                                    279
280    I   Notes to Pages 12-15

      theory from data, see Barney G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss, The Dis-
      covery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research (Chicago:
      Aldine, 1967).


                           1. Values in Leadership
 1. Most of the 100 top executives in education, business, and politics with
    whom I worked through the Instituto FES de Liderazgo in Colombia,
    1991-1992, insisted that Escobar was a "real leader," even though they
    reviled his behavior.
 2. "After Waco, the Focus Shifts to Other Cults," The Boston Globe, April
    30, 1993, p. AI; "Growing Up under Koresh: Cult Children Tell of
    Abuses," The New York Times, May 4, 1993, p. AI.
 3. As long as scholars allow the contradictions and confusion of common
    cultural assumptions to define how we conceive and study leadership, then
    our body of research will reflect the confusion rather than resolve it. Calder
    makes this point by suggesting that our scholarly research on leadership
    has been dominated by everyday assumptions, thereby failing to generate
    "higher-order" abstractions. Instead of examining common attributions
    about leadership as phenomena indicative of cultural patterns, scholars
    have limited their field of view by letting these attributions serve as the
    frame of reference. "The paradox of leadership research is resolved by the
    realization that what has been attempted is not the development of scien-
    tific theory but the systematic and consistent use of everyday thought."
    Bobby J. Calder, "An Attribution Theory of Leadership," in Barry M. Staw
    and Gerald R. Salancik, eds., New Directions in Organizational Behavior
    (Chicago: St. Clair, 1977), p. 182, italics in the original.
 4. Among the most prominent connotations: (1) Leadership is the process of
    influence between a leader and followers to attain organizational objec-
    tives. (2) Leadership is the ability to provide the managerial functions
    associated with positions of senior authority. (3) Leadership means having
    a vision and getting people to realize it. (4) Leadership is the ability to
    influence others, particularly by noncoercive means. See Joseph C. Rost,
    Leadership for the Twenty-First Century (New York: Praeger, 1991),
    pp.38-44.
 5. See Calder, "An Attribution Theory of Leadership," for a discussion of
    how people commonly attribute social causation to the personal capacities
    of individuals, and then call those capacities leadership. Wildavsky suggests
    that people routinely interpret their problems in a characteristic way: "for
    or against existing authority." See Aaron Wildavsky, "A Cultural Theory
    of Leadership," in Bryan D. Jones, ed., Leadership and Politics: New
    Perspectives in Political Science (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas,
    1989), pp. 98-100.
                                               Notes to Pages 15-16 I 281

 6. For some examples, see Elliott Jaques, Requisite Organization: The CEO's
    Guide to Creative Structure and Leadership (Arlington, VA: Cason Hall,
    1989), p. 121; and John P. Kotter, The Leadership Factor (New York: Free
    Press, 1988). Kotter goes farther than many business scholars in his view
    that vision is not only the product of the CEO alone, but the CEO's effort
    to identify and articulate the long-term interests of the parties involved.
    Like Jaques, he also provides a normative conception of process.
 7. "Indo-European Roots," in William Morris, ed., The American Heritage
    Dictionary of the English Language (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1969),
    p. 1526.
 8. See Howard T. Prince and Associates, eds., Leadership in Organizations,
    third edition (West Point, NY: United States Military Academy, 1985).
 9. The following overview simplifies a rich and varied literature on leadership.
    The taxonomy is based on Edwin P. Hollander, "Leadership and Power,"
    in Gordon Lindzey and Elliot Aronson, eds., The Handbook of Social
    Psychology, third edition (New York: Random House, 1985), pp. 485-
    537. For the reader interested in other surveys and typologies of the
    leadership literature, the following are helpful. For a view taken largely
    from social psychology and management studies, see Cecil A. Gibb, "Lead-
    ership," in Gardner Lindzey and Elliot Aronson, eds., The Handbook of
    Social Psychology, second edition (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1969),
    vol. 4, pp. 205-282; and Bernard M. Bass's survey of over 7,500 studies
    of leadership in Bass and Stogdill's Handbook of Leadership, third edition
    (New York: Free Press, 1990). For a political science view, see Glenn D.
    Paige, The Scientific Study of Political Leadership (New York: Free Press,
    1977), chaps. 2-4. For normative views, see Robert Terry, Authentic Lead-
    ership: Courage in Action (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1993); and Rost,
    Leadership for the Twenty-First Century, chaps. 1-4. For views from
    across a range of disciplines, see Barbara Kellerman, ed., Leadership:
    Multidisciplinary Perspectives (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984).
10. For example, Barbara Kellerman in her edited volume Political Leadership:
    A Source Book (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1986), pp. ix-
    xi, organizes her selection of primary sources with the following questions:
    "Do leaders change history? Why do leaders lead? Why do followers
    follow? What are the types of leaders? How do leaders and followers
    relate? Is there a leadership for all seasons?" In the same vein, Jean Blondel
    asks, "What are the origins of [a leader's] power? What are the instruments
    by which this power is exercised? What difference do leaders make?" Jean
    Blondel, Political Leadership: Towards a General Analysis (Beverly Hills,
    CA: Sage, 1987), p. 4.
11. Most dictionaries define leadership as "the ability to lead," i.e., as a set of
    personality traits. Following this cultural preference, research on leadership
    has focused at various times on identifying these traits. Yet the hypothesis
282   I   Notes to Page I 6

    that there are generic abilities to be identified or developed remains some-
    what confused in the leadership literature because the frame of reference
    for leadership shifts in different studies. Conflicting definitional frames of
    reference are used to select whom to analyze. Attempts have even been
    made to lump together different trait studies to see which traits are found
    across a variety of them, yet the studies themselves often select for different
    things: position, informal following, and function. For example, if we select
    a group of CEOs to identify their common characteristics, we implicitly
    equate leadership with holding high positions of authority, or the ability
    to get them. If we define leadership in terms of a set of functions or the
    presence of an informal following, then the people we select to study will
    be different, and the characteristics we identify will differ. For an intro-
    duction to this methodological quandary and a review of the critical
    literature on trait theory, see Bass, Bass and Stogdill's Handbook of Lead-
    ership, chaps. 4 and 5. For specific analyses, see Ralph M. Stogdill, "Per-
    sonal Factors Associated with Leadership: A Survey of the Literature,"
    Journal of Psychology, vol. 25, 1948, pp. 35-71; Charles Bird, Social
    Psychology (New York: Appleton-Century, 1940), pp. 369-395; and Wil-
    liam O. Jenkins, "A Review of Leadership Studies with Particular Refer-
    ence to Military Problems," Psychological Bulletin, vol. 44, 1947,
    pp.54-79.
12. For an analysis of these trends, see "Leadership Definitions: The 1980s,"
    in Rost, Leadership for the Twenty-First Century, chap. 4.
13. See Thomas Carlyle, On Heroes, Hero- Worship, and the Heroic in History,
    written in 1841 (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1907); William James, "Great
    Men, Great Thoughts and Their Environment," Atlantic Monthly, vol. 46,
    October 1880, pp. 441-459; Frederick M. Thrasher, The Gang: A Study
    of 1,313 Gangs in Chicago, second revised edition (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, 1936); and Sidney Hook, The Hero in History: A Study in
    Limitation and Possibility (New York: John Day, 1943). James, Thrasher,
    and Hook, coming long after Carlyle, take serious account of situational
    variables as well as traits. For a critique of Hook's distinction, see Robert
    C. Tucker, Politics as Leadership (Columbia: University of Missouri Press,
    1981), pp. 27-30, who argues that all actors give meaning to events,
    framing them according to their values. Different actors may give the same
    event different meanings and, as a result, engage with it differently, but all
    actors are responsive to events. For an illustrative study of characteristics
    believed to be associated with leadership, see W. H. Cowley, "The Traits
    of Face-to-Face Leaders," Journal of Abnormal Psychology, vol. 26, 1931,
    pp. 304-313. Early perspectives on a hereditary basis for leadership in-
    clude: Frederick Adams Woods, M.D., The Influence of Monarchs: Steps
    in a New Science of History (New York: MacMillan, 1913); and Albert
                                                  Notes to Page 17 I 283

    E. Wiggam, "The Biology of Leadership," in Henry C. Metcalf, ed., Busi-
    ness Leadership (New York: Pitman, 1931), pp. 13-32.
14. James Madison, for example, exercised leadership brilliantly as congress-
    man and as key framer of the Constitution, but performed far less bril-
    liantly, some say poorly, as President. John Quincy Adams, as diplomat
    and Secretary of State, "must rank among the greatest this nation has
    produced, yet as President was a disappointment." Richard Ellis and Aaron
    Wildavsky, '''Greatness' Revisited: Evaluating the Performance of Early
    American Presidents in Terms of Cultural Dilemmas," Presidential Studies
    Quarterly, vol. 21, winter 1991, p. 31.
15. John K. Hemphill, Situational Factors in Leadership (Columbus: Ohio
    State University Bureau of Educational Research, 1949), p. v, italics added.
    Also see Herbert Spencer, The Study of Sociology (New York: D. A.
    Appleton, 1884); Fillmore H. Sanford, Authoritarianism and Leadership:
    A Study of the Follower's Orientation to Authority (Philadelphia: Institute
    for Research in Human Relations, 1950); and Alvin W. Gouldner, ed.,
    Studies in Leadership (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1950). A large
    body of work within political science investigates the institutional con-
    straints on individual action. This tradition lies in dynamic tension with
    the biographical tradition, which asserts that individual action impacts
    events and institutions significantly. Fred Greenstein seems to have found
    common ground by suggesting that "the impact of an individual's actions
    varies with (1) the degree to which the actions take place in an environ-
    ment which admits of restructuring, (2) the location of the actor in that
    environment, and (3) the actor's peculiar strengths or weaknesses." Fred
    I. Greenstein, "The Impact of Personality on Politics: An Attempt to Clear
    Away Underbrush," American Political Science Review, vol. 61, 1967,
    pp. 633-634. For a review of these arguments, see Bryan D. Jones, ed.,
    Leadership and Politics: New Perspectives in Political Science (Lawrence,
    KS: University Press of Kansas, 1989); Dankwart Rustow, "Introduction
    to the Issue 'Philosophers and Kings: Studies in Leadership,'" Daedalus,
    vol. 97, summer 1968, pp. 683-694; and Jameson W. Doig and Erwin C.
    Hargrove, "'Leadership' and Political Analysis," in Jameson W. Doig and
    Erwin C. Hargrove, eds., Leadership and Innovation: A Biographical Per-
    spective on Entrepreneurs in Government (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
    versity Press, 1987), chap. 1. Also see Tucker, Politics as Leadership,
    pp. 27-30; James Q. Wilson, "The Politics of Regulation," in James Q.
    Wilson, ed., The Politics of Regulation (New York: Basic, 1980), pp. 357-
    394; Blondel, Political Leadership, chap. 5; and Norman Frohlich, Joe A.
    Oppenheimer, and Oran R. Young, Political Leadership and Collective
    Goods (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1971), pp. 3-11.
16. For the original study distinguishing autocratic and democratic styles of
284   I Notes to Page 1 7

    authority, see Kurt Lewin and Ronald Lippitt, "An Experimental Approach
    to the Study of Autocracy and Democracy: A Preliminary Note," So-
    ciometry, vol. 1, 1938, pp. 292-300. Also see "Leadership as a Function
    of Regime," in Aaron Wildavsky, The Nursing Father: Moses as a Political
    Leader (Alabama: University of Alabama Press, 1984), pp. 182-216, for
    a framework of political development and the challenges of leadership
    appropriate to it. For other analyses of the mesh between leadership style
    and various situational contingencies, see Fred E. Fiedler, A Theory of
    Leadership Effectiveness (New York: McGraw Hill, 1967); Victor Vroom
    and Philip W. Yetton, Leadership and Decision-Making (Pittsburgh: Uni-
    versity of Pittsburgh Press, 1973); Paul Hersey and Kenneth Blanchard,
    Management of Organizational Behavior: Utilizing Human Resources
    (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977); and Gary A. YukI, Leadership
    in Organizations, second edition (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
    1989).
17. See Edward E. Jones, Kenneth J. Gergen, and Robert E. Jones, "Tactics of
    Ingratiation among Leaders and Subordinates in a Status Hierarchy," Psy-
    chological Monographs, vol. 77, 1963, pp. 1-20; Edwin P. Hollander,
    Leadership Dynamics: A Practical Guide to Effective Relationships (New
    York: Free Press, 1978); and Morris P. Fiorina and Kenneth A. Shepsle,
    "Formal Theories of Leadership: Agents, Agenda Setters, and Entrepre-
    neurs," in Jones, ed., Leadership and Politics, pp. 17-40.
18. This approach overlaps with the situational perspective, which places em-
    phasis on the institutional forces that influence leadership behavior. The
    difference is perhaps a matter of balance. Are patterns of influence a matter
    of mutual transaction, or is influence primarily "in the hands" of institu-
    tions that determine the behavior of actors? See "The Nature of Leader-
    ship," in David B. Truman, The Governmental Process (New York: Knopf,
    1951), pp. 188-193; "The Ambiguity of Leadership," in Robert A. Dahl,
    Who Governs? (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1961), pp. 89-103;
    and Bruce J. Crowe, Stephen Bochner and Alfred W. Clark, "The Effects
    of Subordinates' Behavior on Managerial Style," Human Relations, vol.
    25, July 1972, pp. 215-237. Cecil Gibb, who calls the transactional ap-
    proach interaction theory, describes it this way: "Followers subordinate
    themselves not to an individual who is utterly different but to a member
    of their group who has superiority at this time and who is fundamentally
    the same as they are, and who at other times is prepared to be a follower
    just as they are ... The leader inevitably embodies many of the qualities
    of the followers. Any individual's personality at a given point in time
    reflects the field forces with which it is interacting." Cecil A. Gibb, ed.,
    Leadership (Middlesex, England: Penguin, 1969), p. 210.
19. Hollander, Leadership Dynamics.
                                               Notes to Pages 17-18        I 285

20. Richard E. Neustadt, Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents: The
    Politics of Leadership from Roosevelt to Reagan, third edition (New York:
    Free Press, 1990), pp. 40-49.
21. Glenn Paige grapples with this problem explicitly in his comparison of
    Hitler and Gandhi along various dimensions. His eighteen dimensions of
    analysis (e.g., coercion, consensus, technicity, creativity, and morality) gen-
    erate normative assessments and predictions. However, Paige joins with
    nearly all political scientists in defining leadership in "value-free" terms:
    the behavior of people in positions of political authority, and their com-
    petitors. Thus, both Gandhi and Hitler are considered leaders. See Glenn
    D. Paige, The Scientific Study of Political Leadership (New York: Free
    Press, 1977), pp. 1 and 139-149.
22. Fred E. Fiedler, A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness (New York: McGraw
    Hill, 1967). Other major theorists of contingency theory, like Vroom and
    his collaborators, place value on "organizational effectiveness," and not
    simply the ability to maintain control or power. Organizational effective-
    ness means the accomplishment of organizational objectives. The hypothe-
    sis is that some situations call for autocratic decisionmaking while others
    call for various forms of consultation and participation. The decisionmaker
    should decide which mode of decisionmaking is most effective given the
    nature of the situation. For example, one should engage the participation
    of subordinates whenever one thinks their perspectives are necessary either
    to the decision itself, or to their commitment to the decision. See Victor
    Vroom and Philip W. Yetton, Leadership and Decision-Making (New York:
    Wiley, 1974); and Victor Vroom and Arthur Jago, The New Leadership:
    Managing Participation in Organizations (Englewood-Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
    Hall, 1988).
23. One might ask: Could transactional and political theorists correct the
    problem of the consumption of their "value-free" theories as normative
    values by simply clarifying that they are speaking about means and not
    ends? In theory, perhaps. But in practice, I do not think people will
    internalize the distinction as long as the word leadership is used. The term,
    in my experience, is already firmly attached to the orienting values and
    self-images of young adults and working people. See Ronald A. Heifetz,
    Riley M. Sinder, Alice Jones, Lynn M. Hodge, and Keith A. Rowley,
    "Teaching and Assessing Leadership Courses at the John F. Kennedy
    School of Government," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, vol.
    8, summer 1989, pp. 536-562. Under the direction of Dr. Sharon Parks,
    the Lilly Endowment has sponsored a more full description and evaluation
    of these courses to determine, in part, their impact on the construction of
    values.
24. Operating in a descriptive tradition, many leadership scholars assume that
    the task of scholarship is to identify, describe, and analyze what leadership
286   I Notes to Pages 18-19

    is. Yet, as others before me have suggested, this has been difficult because
    there are no clear cultural agreements defining the term. "The existing
    literatures do not 'add up' (Argyris, 1979) partly for the reason that diverse
    phenomena have been studied in the name of leadership." (Hosking and
    Morley [p. 89], cited in Rost [p. 6]). Consequently, scholars have studied
    a variety of things under the rubric of leadership, and, in addition, have
    frequently left the value dimensions implicit. In this regard, Joseph Rost
    stands out for his recent effort to define his terms and analyze why he
    chooses them. Yet even Rost seems to offer a normative definition of
    leadership in a classical mode when he complains that "leadership scholars
    still have no clear understanding of what leadership is" (p. 14), and then
    proceeds to offer his value-infused perspective in the spirit of a truth, as
    if it were the nature and essence of leadership. It seems to me that scholars
    might usefully consider that leadership is less an "is" than a "should be,"
    and that our arguments might center not around who has most accurately
    described objective reality (or perhaps prevailing cultural assumptions) but
    around what image we can usefully offer to people who in part shape their
    self-images by our conceptions. That may be quite a hard task from the
    point of view of research methodology, but at least we will be wrestling
    with the problem before us. See Rost, Leadership for the Twenty-First
    Century; Dian-Marie Hosking and Ian E. Morley, "The Skills of Leader-
    ship," in James G. Hunt, B. Rajaram Baliga, H. Peter Dachler, and Chester
    A. Schriesheim, eds., Emerging Leadership Vistas (Lexington, MA: Lex-
    ington Books, 1988), pp. 89-106; and Chris Argyris, "How Normal Sci-
    ence Methodology Makes Leadership Research Less Additive and Less
    Applicable," in James G. Hunt and Lars L. Larson, eds., Crosscurrents in
    Leadership (Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1979).
25. I prefer the term "orienting values" over "end values" because I think
    "end values" function by orienting people's choices of instruments. They
    are "where people come from," and not where they are going, as the term
    "end" suggests. For example, in decisionmaking about one's children, one
    is oriented by the value love. Love serves not as an end or a goal, but as
    a source of daily orientation.
26. Political scientists have tended to conceive of politics using powers and
    influence as the units of analysis. Yet there is a school of political thought,
    going back at least as far as Plato, that uses the polity's direction and work
    as the frame of reference. See Tucker, Politics as Leadership, pp. 4-9. Carl
    Friedrich put it this way, "To differentiate the leadership of a Luther from
    the leadership of a Hitler is crucial for a political science that is to 'make
    sense'; if a political science is incapable of that, it is pseudo-science, because
    the knowledge it imparts is corrupting and not guiding." Carl J. Friedrich,
    "Political Leadership and the Problem of the Charismatic Power," Journal
    of Politics, vol. 24, February 1961, p. 19.
                                               Notes to Pages 19-20        I   287

27. lowe this idea to Thomas C. Schelling.
28. As suggested, this idea is analyzed by Vroom, Yetton, and Jago. Their focus
    is on decisionmaking processes by authority figures within organizations
    rather than, as in this study, problem-defining and problem-solving proc-
    esses in complex political environments, or leadership without authority.
    See Vroom and Yetton, Leadership and Decision-Making; and Vroom and
    jago, The New Leadership: Managing Participation in Organizations.
29. Tucker makes this point from a purely analytic perspective: "In the final
    analysis, the strength of leadership as an influencing relation rests upon its
    effectiveness as activity." Tucker, Politics as Leadership~ p. 25. Preceding
    this perspective is a research approach established in the 1950s in social
    psychology and organizational behavior in which researchers began to
    examine behavior instead of personality. Specifically, they focused on two
    behaviors of people in positions of organizational authority: consideration
    for the satisfaction of subordinates and the initiation of structure (defining
    the task, initiating and organizing the work process, and maintaining
    standards). Most researchers have assumed that different situations will
    demand different balances between these two behaviors, and they have
    studied the contingencies distinguishing them. In contrast, some have ad-
    vocated an all-seasons approach. In particular, Robert R. Blake and Jane
    S. Mouton, in The Managerial Grid III (Houston: Gulf Publishing Com-
    pany, 1985), recommend both a high concern for people and a high
    concern for production as a generic approach to leadership. In general,
    these studies focus on the behavior of those with organizational authority.
    For the classic description of this work, see Ralph M. Stogdill and Alvin
    E. Coons, eds., Leader Behavior: Its Description and Measurement (Co-
    lumbus: Ohio State University Bureau of Business Research, 1957). For a
    review, see "Consideration, Initiating Structure, and Related Factors for
    Describing the Behavior of Leaders," in Bass, Bass and Stogdill's Hand-
    book of Leadership~ chap. 24.
30. Many researchers and training organizations spend a great deal of time
    reinforcing the personalistic view of leadership by administering batteries
    of personality tests as a core element of leadership development. Although
    the tests may be of great use in generating reflection and insight among
    the people tested, which may be important skills of leadership, they are
    often unhinged from any clear operational conception of leadership. Lack-
    ing a basis in a conceptual framework of leadership strategy, they do not
    tell people enough about the effective use of their skills in the practice of
    leadership. For the pioneering efforts in this area of inquiry, see the various
    publications of the Center for Creative Leadership, Greensboro, North
    Carolina.
31. For a discussion of pathological personality structures and their mesh with
    institutional roles of authority, see Otto F. Kernberg, "Regression in Or-
288        I Notes to Pages 20-21

    ganizational Leadership," in Arthur D. Colman and Marvin H. Geller,
    eds., Group Relations Reader 2 (Washington, DC: A. K. Rice Institute,
    1985), pp. 96-106.
32. Pierre M. Turquet describes this dynamic in "Leadership: The Individual
    and the Group," in Colman and Geller, eds., Group Relations Reader 2,
    p. 85. There is little doubt in my mind that talented individuals have much
    to learn to lead effectively. To use an analogy, even the most gifted young
    violinist is ruined by poor training. To become a great violinist requires
    both talent and great training. Furthermore, quite average children with
    fine training make excellent musicians. All too often, terms like talent and
    character suggest something immutable after an early age. Indeed, follow-
    ing the influence of Freud's theory of human development, many scholars
    of leadership and politics make the assumption that inclinations and pref-
    erences are fixed in early childhood. In contrast, Dankwart Rustow stresses
    the importance of "conceiving of the leader's personality, not as fixed, but
    as changing; to consider, in turn, the character traits that he may display
    in long years of waiting for his opportunity, the new resources of person-
    ality that he brings to bear as he assumes his role as leader, and the decline
    which his personality may undergo as his historic task is accomplished."
    Rustow draws on Albert Hirschman's notion of "reform-mongering" in
    his study of economic development in Latin America to suggest that the
    "reform-monger or the charismatic leader is likely to emerge as the teacher
    in such a process, but to teach others he must first learn himself." (Rustow,
    "Introduction," pp. 690 and 683-694.) Rustow is not being naive about
    adult learning capacity. Erik Erikson, Robert Kegan, Elliott Jaques, and
    others have studied and persuasively argued that people continue to learn
    and develop through adolescent and adult years beyond merely the acqui-
    sition of information, but in profound ways. See Erik Erikson, Young Man
    Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History (New York: Norton, 1958);
    Robert Kegan, The Evolving Self (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
    1982); and "Cognitive Processes: How They Work and How They Ma-
    ture," in Elliott Jaques, Requisite Organization: The CEO's Guide to
    Creative Structure and Leadership (Arlington, VA: Cason Hall, 1989), sect.
      5.
33. See "The Power of Leadership," in James MacGregor Burns, Leadership
    (New York: Harper Colophon, 1978), chap. 1.
34. "The Structure of Moral Leadership," in Burns, Leadership, chap. 2.
    Other organizational and political theorists have modified and elaborated
    Burns' concept of transformational leadership by converting it into a
    nonnormative framework. See Bernard M. Bass, Leadership and Perfor-
    mance beyond Expectations; and Erwin C. Hargrove, "Two Conceptions
    of Institutional Leadership," in Jones, ed., Leadership and Politics, pp. 57-
    83. Both conceive of transformation, not in Burns' sense of elevating the
                                               Notes to Pages 21-23        /   289

    moral functioning of a polity but in the sense of inspiration, intellectual
    stimulation, and personal consideration (Bass), or altering the basic nor-
    mative principles that guide an institution (Hargrove, p. 66).
35. See Tucker, Politics as Leadership, pp. 77-79, for his discussion of non-
    constituted leaders.
36. See Max Weber, "Politics as a Vocation," in Gerth and Mills, eds., From
    Max Weber, pp. 77-128. Professor Michael O'Hare at the University of
    California, Berkeley, provided the articulation of this idea.
37. See Vroom and Jago, The New Leadership: Managing Participation in
    Organizations.
38. Burns, Leadership, pp. 42-43; and Tucker, Politics as Leadership, pp. 98-
    105. For a review of the leadership literature in regard to conflict, its
    sources and management, see "Conflict and Legitimacy in the Leadership
    Role," in Bass, Bass and Stogdill's Handbook of Leadership, chap. 15.
39. Robert C. Tucker follows a similar logic, although he stops short of a
    normative conception. By building on Cecil Gibb's statement that" leader-
    ship flourishes in a problem situation," Tucker orients leadership by the
    activities of problem definition, policy formulation, and policy implemen-
    tation. His emphasis on problem definition points us in the direction of
    reality testing as a key instrumental value in leadership. See Tucker, Politics
    as Leadership, pp. 18-19; and Cecil A. Gibb, "The Principles and Traits
    of Leadership," in Gibb, ed., Leadership, p. 211.
40. Selznick provides an elegant analysis of the role of organizational leader-
    ship in shaping the orienting values of an institution, in Philip Selznick,
    Leadership in Administration: A Sociological Interpretation (New York:
    Harper and Row, 1957). Also Drath and Palus at the Center for Creative
    Leadership have been working on a conception of leadership (based on
    Robert Kegan's work) as "meaning making in collective experience,"
    which points us toward the task of giving people a way to make sense of
    their situation. Wilfred Drath and Charles Palus, "Leadership as Meaning
    Making in Collective Experience" (Greensboro: Center for Creative Lead-
    ership, 1993).
41. Collins and Porras divide vision into two components: purpose (a state-
    ment of orienting values) and mission (a medium-term practical goal that
    accounts for current reality). See James C. Collins and Jerry I. Porras,
    "Organizational Vision and Visionary Organizations," California Manage-
    ment Review, vol. 34, fall 1991, pp. 30-52.
42. See Neustadt's analysis of Truman's mishandling of the Korean War in
    Presidential Power, pp. 103-122, in which he analyzes the President's role
    as teacher in taking events and giving them meaning. His analysis could
    be used to support Tucker's critique of Sidney Hook's distinction between
    eventful and event-making men, as described in note 13, above.
43. Quoted in Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., "A Clinton Report Card, So Far,"
290   I   Notes to Page 24

    The New York Times, April 11, 1993, Section 4, p. 13. Schlesinger sug-
    gests, "Except for the part about admitting failure frankly, that was the
    story of Roosevelt's New Deal." For examples of improvisation in other
    contexts, see "War Is the Domain of Uncertainty," in Major General Baron
    Hugo von Freytag-Loringhoven, "The Power of Personality in War,"
    Roots of Strategy: 3 Military Classics, Book 3 (Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole,
    1991), chap. 4, pp. 252-289; Michael Cohen and James March, Leader-
    ship and Ambiguity: The American College President, second edition (Bos-
    ton: Harvard Business School Press, 1986); and Robert D. Behn,
    Leadership Counts: Lessons for Public Managers (Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press, 1991).
44. Burns, Leadership, chap. 1.
45. For a discussion of Hitler's faulty diagnoses, see Tucker, Politics as Lead-
    ership, pp. 89-96. For an analysis of the domestic causes of war, with
    implications for the genesis of World War II, see Jack S. Levy, "Domestic
    Politics and War," in Robert I. Rotberg and Theodore K. Rabb, eds., The
    Origin and Prevention of Major Wars (Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press, 1989).
46. In the postwar years, Jasper Shannon wrote, "Perhaps a more realistic, not
    to say more scientific age will look upon our belief in leaders who can
    solve our social ills by political magic as absurd as we regard the divine
    power attributed to monarchs in the healing of bodily ills." "The Study
    of Political Leadership," in Jasper B. Shannon, ed., The Study of Com-
    parative Government (New York: Greenwood, 1949); cited also in Paige,
    The Scientific Study of Political Leadership, p. 42.
47. In the U.S. system, reality testing takes both analytic and political forms
    as each political faction sends its own policy analysts to work, and where
    open deliberation about the differences among them is often the norm.
    See, for example, Charles E. Lindblom, The Policy-Making Process (Engle-
    wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1968).
48. A diagnostic error, made consciously, is also immoral. Because a common
    tendency in human societies is to flee bad news, seek simplifying solutions,
    or cluster around old ones, we become vulnerable to charlatans who
    mislead us through misdiagnosis.
49. Other scholars have tackled this normative problem in a way somewhat
    similar to mine, yet with formulations that seem to me less useful to the
    practitioner. For example, ethicist Robert Terry, formerly director of the
    Reflective Leadership Center at the Hubert H. Humphrey School of Public
    Affairs, University of Minnesota, offers this definition: "Leadership is the
    courage to bring forth and let come forth authentic action in the com-
    mons." His use of "authentic action" is akin to what I mean by reality-
    testing. See Terry, Authentic Leadership. Joseph Rost offers this definition:
    "Leadership is an influence relationship among leaders and followers who
                                              Notes to Pages 25-30       I 291

    intend real changes that reflect their mutual purposes." By "real changes,"
    Rost is again tracking the idea of adaptive work. See Rost, Leadership for
    the Twenty-First Century, p. 102.
50. For an analysis of conspiracy theories used historically by people to explain
    their predicaments, see Franz Neumann, "Anxiety and Politics," in The
    Democratic and the Authoritarian State: Essays in Political and Legal
    Theory (New York: Free Press of Glencoe, 1957), pp. 283-287. Neumann
    suggests that "just as the masses hope for their deliverance from distress
    through absolute oneness with a person [a charismatic figure], so they
    ascribe their distress to certain persons who brought this distress into the
    world through a conspiracy . . . Hatred, resentment, dread, created by
    great upheavals, are concentrated on certain persons who are denounced
    as devilish conspirators" (p. 279); cited also in Robert C. Tucker, "The
    Theory of Charismatic Leadership," Daedalus, vol. 97, summer 1968,
    p. 752. For a view of scapegoating from object relations theory, see
    Leonard Horwitz, "Projective Identification in Dyads and Groups," in
    Colman and Geller, eds., Group Relations Reader 2, pp. 28-30.
51. See Eric J. Miller, "Organizational Development and Industrial Democ-
    racy: A Current Case-Study," in Colman and Geller, eds., Group Relations
    Reader 2, p. 245.


                           2. To Lead or Mislead?
 1. The word "stress" has physiological and psychological significance. Scien-
    tists use the term as a metaphor to describe more vividly ecological systems
    in disequilibrium, even though these systems do not "experience" stress.
 2. The equilibria of nature are often dynamic, not static. The specific balance
    will change over time as conditions change and perturb the system. A new
    balance is reached, however temporary it too may be. For example, one
    species dies out and another takes up its ecological niche.
 3. See "An Analysis of the Concept of Natural Selection," in Ernst Mayr,
    Toward a New Philosophy of Biology: Observations of an Evolutionist
    (Cambridge: Belknap/Harvard University Press, 1988), pp. 95-115.
 4. John A. Moore, Science as a Way of Knowing: The Foundations of Modern
    Biology (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), pp. 163-164.
 5. Roger D. Masters, The Nature of Politics (New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 1989), p. 129.
 6. For a study of Moses leading the slaves through various stages of political
    development and transforming them into a nation, see Aaron Wildavsky,
    The Nursing Father: Moses as a Political Leader (Alabama: University of
    Alabama Press, 1984).
 7. For an introduction to the literature of organizational learning and culture
    change, see Chris Argyris and Donald Schon, Organizational Learning: A
292   /   Notes to Pages 31-35

    Theory of Action Perspective (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1978); Ter-
    rence E. Deal and Allan A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures: The Rites and
    Rituals of Corporate Life (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982); Rosabeth
    Moss Kanter, The Change Masters (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1983);
    Edward Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership: A Dynamic View
    (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985); Ralph H. Kilmann, Mary J. Saxton,
    Roy Serpa, and Associates, Gaining Control of the Corporate Culture (San
    Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1985); James M. Kouzes and Barry Z. Posner, The
    Leadership Challenge: How to Get Extraordinary Things Done in Organi-
    zations (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1987); and Peter M. Senge, The Fifth
    Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization (New York:
    Doubleday, 1990). Also see Talcott Parsons, The Evolution of Societies
    (Englewood-Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977), for an effort to identify the
    elements of a social system that increase its general adaptive capacity.
 8. For the classic description of how mindsets shape the collection and inter-
    pretation of data, see Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolu-
    tions, second edition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970).
 9. This is not an argument for the notion that all reality is relative and in
    the eyes of the beholder. Although the analysis of problems is fundamen-
    tally affected by values, which are relative, that is not to say that "what
    is" is simply a matter of opinion. Diagnosing a problem, within a particular
    value orientation, proceeds quite usefully according to scientific principles
    that enable one to distinguish reality from fantasy.
10. This story is presented as allegory, not history, because it is based on
    archeologists' speculations about the settlement and decline of Easter Is-
    land. For an introduction to the archeological literature on Easter Island,
    see Jo Anne Van Tilburg, "HMS Topaze on Easter Island" (London: British
    Museum Occasional Paper #73, 1992). Also see Jo Anne Van Tilburg,
    "Pseudoscience and Commodification in the Pacific: Selling Easter Island
    as Myth, Mystery, and Metaphor," Paper delivered at the Annual Meeting,
    Society for American Archeology, Pittsburgh, PA, March 1992.
11. Personal communication, Dr. Jo Anne Van Tilburg, Institute of Archeology,
    UCLA, April 1992.
12. Jo Anne Van Tilburg, "HMS Topaze on Easter Island," p. 90.
13. I frequently use the term norms in this study inclusively to mean conven-
    tions, habits, generally accepted values, and, at times, formal rules and
    procedures that govern behavior in an organization or community. (My
    apologies to the anthropologists and sociologists.)
14. See "The Equilibrium of Institutionalized Groups," in David B. Truman,
    The Governmental Process (New York: Knopf, 1951), pp. 27-33.
15. See Albert o. Hirschman, The Strategy of Economic Development (New
    Haven: Yale University Press, 1958), pp. 47-49, in which he applies a
    learning model to economic development. Not surprisingly, the "price of
                                               Notes to Pages 35-41       I 293

    development is a high one in terms of human suffering, social tensions,
    forced abandonment of tradition and values, etc." (p. 48).
16. I conceive of urgency as an indicator of stress both in its rate of increase
    as well as its severity. For example, a sudden increase in stress may produce
    more urgency than a slowly increasing level that plateaus, even if the
    plateau is higher than the level reached suddenly. These are questions for
    empirical research that go beyond the classic experiments with boiling
    frogs. (Drop a frog in boiling water and it will jump out; slowly heat the
    water to a boil and the frog will remain in the water and die.) For example,
    we need to understand the variables by which different organizations and
    societies tolerate better a fast jolt to their system (e.g., Poland's economic
    policies of the 1990s), or a gradual and sustained challenge.
17. For example, in its motto kaizen-eontinuous improvement-the Toyota
    Corporation established a set of organizational values and norms oriented
    by the ongoing need to learn and adapt.
18. For analyses of both the adaptive and self-defeating aspects of defensive
    behavior at the individual level, see Anna Freud, The Ego and the Mecha-
    nisms of Defense, revised edition (New York: International Universities
    Press, 1966); and George E. Vaillant, The Wisdom of the Ego (Cambridge:
    Harvard University Press, 1993), chap. 1. At the group and organizational
    levels, see Wilfred R. Bion, Experiences in Groups (New York: Basic,
    1961); Chris Argyris, Strategy, Change, and Defensive Routines (Boston:
    Pitman, 1985), and Overcoming Organizational Defenses: Facilitating Or-
    ganizational Learning (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1990); Larry Hirschhorn,
    The Workplace Within: Psychodynamics of Organizational Life (Cam-
    bridge: MIT Press, 1988); and Irving Janis and Leon Mann, Decision
    Making: A Psychological Analysis of Conflict, Choice, and Commitment
    (New York: Free Press, 1977).
19. The father's own vulnerability to experiencing intolerable distress in re-
    sponse to the child is a more complex psychological process than summa-
    rized here. See Edward R. Shapiro and A. Wesley Carr, Lost in Familiar
    Places (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991), pp. 13-14.
20. Craig Snyder, ed., The Strategic Defense Debate (Philadelphia: University
    of Pennsylvania Press, 1966), p. 220.
21. Strobe Talbott, "SDI During the Reagan Years," in Joseph S. Nye and
    James S. Schear, eds., On the Defensive: The Future of SDI (Lanham, MD:
    University Press of American, 1988), p. 16.
22. William Broad, "Long Streams of People Led to Stars Wars Speech," The
    New York Times, March 4, 1985, p. Al.
23. Talbott, "SDI During the Reagan Years."
24. See Ronald Reagan, An American Life (New York: Simon and Schuster,
    1990), chap. 70.
25. See Ashton Carter and David Schwartz, eds., Ballistic Missile Defense
294   /   Notes to Pages 41-43

    (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1984); and Thomas C. Schelling,
    "What Went Wrong with Arms Control?" Foreign Affairs, vol. 64, winter
    1985/86, pp. 219-233.
26. Robert McNamara, "Reducing the Risk of Nuclear War," in Snyder, The
    Strategic Defense Debate, p. 124.
27. Talbott, "SDI During the Reagan Years."
28. By a margin of 3 to 2, many Americans were seeing "the Soviet Union as
    a growing threat as well as an immediate danger." By an even larger
    margin,2 to 1, 64 percent of Americans favored a mutual freeze compared
    with 25 percent who favored an arms buildup. "Poll Finds Doubt over
    Responses to Soviet Threat," The New York Times, April 15, 1983, p. Al.
    (Although the poll was taken two weeks after the President's March 23
    speech, the poll did not refer to SDI, which had not yet come alive in the
    public debate.)
29. According to Talbott's account, Assistant Secretary of Defense for Inter-
    national Security Policy Richard Perle championed the cause of SDI as a
    weapons system to protect U.S. silos, while Secretary of State George
    Shultz and his special advisor for arms control, Paul Nitze, saw SDI as a
    bargaining chip. Talbott, "SDI During the Reagan Years."
30. None of us can get inside the mind and recreate the thought process of
    President Reagan. His memoirs are not of much help in fathoming the
    unreality of SDI as he packaged it for the nation. In them, he seems not
    to notice the inconsistency of his vision of impenetrable defense with the
    reality of the limits of SDI, even if it were to work as planned. Reagan
    seemed unusually capable of commitment to his central convictions, be it
    lower taxes or SDI, and uncaring about the "details" that might temper
    those convictions. I believe it had more to do with his capacity to live in
    dreams than with any cynical strategy of deceit. See Richard E. Neustadt,
    Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents (New York: Free Press,
    1991), pp. 276-279.
31. Colin Gray, "Deterrence and Strategic Defense," in Snyder, The Strategic
    Defense Debate, p. 175. In the case of SOl, this included the problem of
    relating to American allies in Europe, who were incensed by Reagan's
    failure to consult with them before presenting his idea. As Francis Pym,
    former Foreign Secretary of State of Great Britain for Foreign and Com-
    monwealth Affairs, put it, "The bedrock of our security is the positive
    acceptance of our peoples of an effective strategy for both defense and
    disarmament. To obtain that acceptance and support is among the top
    priorities for all politicians and statesmen in the West. What is required is
    a continuous process of presentation and explanation of what the issues
    are-presentations that analyze the problems fully, frankly, and fairly, and
    that expose the options available. It is not a question of 'selling' SDI; it is
                                               Notes to Pages 43-46        I 295

    a question of taking people into your confidence." Francis Pym, "A Euro-
    pean View," in Snyder, The Strategic Defense Debate, p. 136.
32. Michael Vlahos, "Perceptions of Power," in Snyder, The Strategic Defense
    Debate, pp. 80-81. According to the panel President Reagan convened to
    create a plan for SOl, chaired by Dr. James C. Fletcher, strategic defenses
    could only be effective if "sized" to Soviet offensive forces. To be effective,
    SOl would have to be linked to arms control in order to avoid simply
    escalating the arms race into new domains. Even SOl required relating. See
    Alex Gliksman, "The Strategic Defense Environment," in Snyder, The
    Strategic Defense Debate, pp. 199-200.
33. One expression of this resistance was the Jackson-Vanik Amendment of
    1973, which derailed Nixon's efforts at detente. See Henry Kissinger, Years
    of Upheaval (Boston: Little, Brown, 1982), pp. 986-998.
34. Gregory F. Treverton, "'Foreign' Assessment," Discussion Paper Series
    #148D (Cambridge: John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
    University, 1986).
35. James G. Blight and David A. Welch, On the Brink: Americans and Soviets
    Reexamine the Cuban Missile Crisis (New York: Hill and Wang, 1989),
    pp. 29, 238, 258, 294-295, and 302.
36. Carter and Schwartz, Ballistic Missile Defense, p. 1.
37. According to a Washington Post poll, 55 percent of Americans favored a
    system that would "guarantee protection of the nation against nuclear
    attack regardless of cost." "Poll Shows Public Optimism on Arms Cuts,"
    The Washington Post, November 17, 1985, p. A27. In other polls the same
    week, a Time Magazine poll suggested that 68 percent of the public
    believed that SDI was likely to work; in a New York Times/CBS poll, 58
    percent of respondents felt the same optimism. In a Gallup survey, 61
    percent wanted to "see the u.S. go ahead with the development of SDI."
    These three polls are reported in "US public opinion generally favors 'Star
    Wars,'" The Christian Science Monitor, November 21, 1985, p. 3.
38. See Ashton B. Carter, "Directed Energy Missile Defense in Space," Back-
    ground paper prepared for the Office of Technology Assessment, Congress,
    Washington, DC, April 1984.
39. Perhaps this gives away too much to FOR, but I don't think so. His
    campaign strategy was shaped by isolationist public opinion, which in turn
    shaped the antiwar democratic platform and the charges of war-mongering
    by Wendell Wilkie, his Republican opponent. Surely, Roosevelt misled the
    public on his stand toward entering the Nazi War to get reelected. Reelec-
    tion politics indicated to him the rate at which the country seemed ready
    to tackle the problem posed by a potential Nazi takeover of Europe.
    Getting elected was not only an end unto itself, it was also a means to
    pursue the foreign policy that Roosevelt saw as necessary.
40. Johnson's decisions to escalate the war in Vietnam, as I discuss in Chapter
296   I Notes to Pages 46-50

    7, may also have involved self-deception in the form of overly optimistic
    forecasting.
41. By collusion, I mean a deliberate or unconscious collaboration, usually the
    latter.
42. Leon Wieseltier, "Traditional Deterrence," in Snyder, The Strategic De-
    fense Debate.
43. As McGeorge Bundy, et aI., put it, "We believe the President's initiative to
    be a classic case of good intentions that will have bad results because they
    do not respect reality." In McGeorge Bundy, George Kennan, Robert
    McNamara, and Gerard Smith, "The President's Choice: Star Wars or
    Arms Control," Foreign Affairs, vol. 63, winter 1984/85, pp. 264-278.


                         3. The Roots of Authority
 1. See Allan Mazur, "A Cross-Species Comparison of Status in Small Estab-
    lished Groups," American Sociological Review, vol. 38, October 1973,
    pp. 513-530. Mazur describes in his cross-species studies the critical role
    of deference behavior. Apparently, the emergence of deference behavior
    correlates in higher primates (macaques, baboons, chimpanzees, and go-
    rillas) with the presence of control and service behaviors by dominant
    individuals. In these primates, the deferring individual will avoid confron-
    tation and allow the dominant individual the right-of-way. In contrast, in
    primates genetically more distant from humans (shrews and squirrel mon-
    keys), dominance is maintained through threat, chase, or attack, not active
    deference, and in these species, we do not see service and control behaviors.
 2. See Muzafer Sherif, An Outline of Social Psychology (New York: Harper,
    1948); David A. Easton, A Systems Analysis of Political Life (New York:
    Wiley, 1965), pp. 205-207 and 215-217; Robert A. Dahl, After the Revo-
    lution?-Authority in a Good Society (New Haven: Yale, 1970); and
    Richard Sennett, Authority (New York: Knopf, 1980). For an analysis of
    the ways in which u.S. Presidents have dealt with the antiauthority bias
    of American political culture dating from the nation's rebellious beginning,
    see Richard Ellis and Aaron Wildavsky, "'Greatness' Revisited: Evaluating
    the Performance of Early American Presidents in Terms of Cultural Dilem-
    mas," Presidential Studies Quarterly, vol. 21, winter 1991, pp. 15-34.
 3. Of course, our primate ancestors no longer exist. Current primates have
    undergone evolutionary change over time as have humans, and therefore
    investigating current primates gives us a glimpse into likely ancestral be-
    havior, but not an exact portrayal.
 4. See "Evolution of Grouping Patterns," in Robin 1. M. Dunbar, Primate
    Social Systems (New York: Comstock/Cornell University Press, 1988),
    chap. 7; and Edward o. Wilson, Sociobiology, abridged edition (Cam-
    bridge: Harvard University Press, 1980), chap. 3.
                                             Notes to Pages 50-51       /   297

 5. Economists and political theorists who work on the problems of coordi-
    nation, cooperation, and collective action may easily recognize the discus-
    sion in this study. Although the language differs, this study is centrally
    concerned with the social functions of authority systems, their relationship
    to other cultural constructs (for example, common identifications, shared
    norms and values), and the role of leadership in raising the quality of
    collective performance in the face of complex problems that generate
    divisiveness. Perhaps the central difference between this study and the
    tradition of Mancur Olson, Robert Axelrod, Douglass North, Elinor Os-
    trom, Robert Putnam, and others is the unit of analysis: the individual
    actor changing institutions versus the nature and design of institutions per
    see See Mancur Olson, The Logic of Collective Action (New York: Cam-
    bridge University Press, 1965); Robert Axelrod, The Evolution of Coop-
    eration (New York: Basic, 1984); Douglass C. North, Institutions,
    Institutional Change, and Economic Performance (New York: Cambridge
    University Press, 1990); Elinor Ostrom, Governing the Commons: The
    Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action (New York: Cambridge
    University Press, 1990); and Robert D. Putnam, Making Democracy Work:
    Civic Traditions in Modern Italy (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
    1993).
 6. See Marshall Sahlins, The Use and Abuse of Biology: An Anthropological
    Critique of Sociobiology (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1976);
    and Stephen Jay Gould, The Mismeasure of Man (New York: Norton,
    1981), chap. 7.
 7. Michael R. A. Chance and Clifford J. Jolly, Social Groups of Monkeys,
    Apes, and Men (New York: Dutton, 1970).
 8. George B. Schaller, The Mountain Gorilla: Ecology and Behavior (Chi-
    cago: University of Chicago Press, 1963), p. 243.
 9. Kelly]. Stewart and Alexander H. Harcourt, "Gorillas: Variations in Fe-
    male Relationships," in Barbara B. Smuts, Dorothy L. Cheney, Robert M.
    Seyfarth, Richard W. Wrangham, and Thomas T. Struhsaker, eds., Primate
    Societies (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987), pp. 158, 163; Rich-
    ard W. Wrangham, "Evolution of Social Structure," in Primate Societies,
    p. 293; and George B. Schaller, The Year of the Gorilla (Chicago: Univer-
    sity of Chicago Press, 1964), p. 133.
10. Schaller, The Mountain Gorilla and The Year of the Gorilla; Dian Fossey,
    Gorillas in the Mist (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1983). Unless otherwise
    noted, all information about gorillas in the following paragraphs is taken
    from these sources.
11. Terry L. Maple and Michael P. Hoff, Gorilla Behavior (New York: Van
    Nostrand Reinhold, 1982), p. 54.
12. Stewart and Harcourt, "Gorillas: Variations in Female Relationships," in
    Primate Societies, pp. 158-159.
298   I   Notes to Pages 52-55

13. Schaller, The Year of the Gorilla, p. 132.
14. See Frans De Waal, Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among the Apes
    (New York: Harper Colophon, 1982); and Frans De Waal Peacemaking
    among Primates (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1989).
15. Jane Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of Behavior (Cam-
    bridge: BelknaplHarvard University Press, 1986), p. 208. See also
    Toshisada Nishida and Mariko Hiraiwa-Hasegawa, "Chimpanzees and
    Bonobos: Cooperative Relationships among Males," in Primate Societies,
    p. 167. De Waal, in Chimpanzee Politics, p. 47, provides a graphic exam-
    ple of the role of dominant individuals in controlling conflict in the context
    of the Arnhem Zoo.
16. Nishida and Hiraiwa-Hasegawa, "Chimpanzees and Bonobos," in Primate
    Societies, p. 175.
17. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Gombe, pp. 525-528. In 1971, the Gombe
    community of chimpanzees split when the male population reached a level
    of fifteen adults. The former beta became the new community's alpha male;
    and a six-year "war" ensued, with invasions, killing, and eventually the
    death (or dispersal) of the new community. The dominant males "prose-
    cuted the war," actively patrolling the territory, attacking and killing es-
    tranged females and their young, and invading across the border to kill
    dominant males. Goodall, The Chimpanzees of Combe, pp. 503-534.
18. Frans De Waal, Chimpanzee Politics, section 2.
19. There are also differences in style within species, even when inhabiting the
    same environment; this appears due, in part, to personality differences
    among dominant animals. Personal communication, Professor Marc
    Hauser, Department of Biological Anthropology, Harvard University, April
    1993.
20. Natural law theory is not social Darwinism, even though it has been
    invoked occasionally on its behalf. For a summary of the origins of natural
    law theory, see Michael Lessnoff, Social Contract (London: MacMillan,
    1986), pp. 20-27. See Gould, The Mismeasure of Man, for a discussion
    of biological potentiality.
21. Sarah Hrdy, The Woman That Never Evolved (Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
    versity Press, 1981), pp. 190-191.
22. See Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents, written in 1930,
    trans. Strachey (New York: Norton, 1961), chaps. 5-8. Freud puts it
    succinctly in describing what civilization must contend with in human
    nature, "Homo homini lupus [Man is a wolf to man]" (p. 65).
23. Gould, The Mismeasure of Man, chap. 7.
24. Rona Abramovitch, "The Relation of Attention and Proximity to Rank in
    Preschool Children," in Michael R. A. Chance and Ray R. Larsen, eds.,
    The Social Structure of Attention (London: Wiley and Sons, 1976),
    pp. 153-176.
                                              Notes to Pages 55-56       /   299

25. K. Toki, "Fiihrer-Gefolgschaftsstruktur in der Schulklasse" [Leader-Fol-
    lower Structure in School Classes], Japanese Journal of Psychology, vol.
     10, 1935, pp. 27-56; cited in Bass, Bass and Stogdill's Handbook of
    Leadership, p. 600.
26. Barbara C. L. Hold, "Attention Structure and Rank Specific Behavior in
    Preschool Children," in Chance and Larsen, eds., The Social Structure of
    Attention, pp. 177-201.
27. Donald R. Omark and Murray S. Edelman, "The Development of Atten-
    tion Structures in Young Children," in Chance and Larsen, eds., The Social
    Structure of Attention, pp. 119-151.
28. Sherwood L. Washburn and David A. Hamburg, "The Implications of
    Primate Research," in Irvin DeVore, ed., Primate Behavior: Field Studies
    of Monkeys and Apes (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965),
    p. 613; also see Donald R. Omark, "The Umwelt and Cognitive Develop-
    ment," in Donald R. Omark, F. F. Strayer, and Daniel G. Freedman, eds.,
    Dominance Relations (New York: Garland STPM Press, 1980), pp. 231-
    258.
29. For an introduction to the literature on small group behavior and leader-
    ship, see Robert F. Bales, "The Equilibrium Problem in Small Groups," in
    Talcott Parsons, Robert F. Bales, and Edward Shils, eds., Working Papers
    in the Theory of Action (New York: Free Press, 1953), pp. 111-161;
    Wilfred R. Bion, Experiences in Groups (New York: Basic Books, 1961);
    Bruce Tuckman, "Developmental Sequence in Small Groups," Psychologi-
    cal Bulletin, vol. 63, June 1965, pp. 384-399; Dorwin Cartwright and
    Alvin Zander, eds., Group Dynamics: Research and Theory, third edition
    (New York: Harper and Row, 1968); and the two-volume series published
    by the A. K. Rice Institute based on work of the Tavistock Institute for
    Human Relations in London: Arthur D. Colman and W. Harold Bexton,
    eds., Group Relations Reader (Sausalito, CA: GREX, 1975); and Arthur
    D. Colman and Marvin H. Geller, eds., Group Relations Reader 2 (Wash-
    ington, DC: A. K. Rice Institute, 1985).
30. Robert F. Bales, Interaction Process Analysis (Reading, MA: Addison-
    Wesley, 1950).
31. Karl Deutsch also describes authority in regard to attention. "A source of
    messages that receives habitual preferential treatment as regards attention,
    transmission, and obedience in politics or social life may be said to possess
    authority ... Authority consists in the successful claim for the preferential
    treatment of messages from a particular source, regardless of their con-
    tent." Karl Deutsch, Nerves of Government (New York: Free Press, 1963),
    p. 179, italics in the original.
32. Harry P. Shelley, "Focused Leadership and Cohesiveness in Small Groups,"
    Sociometry, vol. 23, 1960, pp. 209-216; for a group relations view of these
300      Notes to Pages 56-57

    dynamics, see Kenneth Eisold, "Recovering Bion's Contributions to Group
    Analysis," in Colman and Geller, eds., Group Relations Reader 2, p. 43.
33. For a psychoanalytic view of the dynamics by which "central persons" are
    incorporated into the conscience and ego-ideal of group members, see
    Sigmund Freud, Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, written
    in 1921, trans. Strachey (New York: Norton, 1959), pp. 25-42; and Fritz
    Redl, "Group Emotion and Leadership," Psychiatry, vol. 5, November
    1942, pp. 573-596. Freud emphasizes that widespread bonds of identifica-
    tion throughout the group with the "central person" provide the glue that
    holds the group together, whereas Redl amends this view by suggesting
    that in the presence of some styles of "central persons," bonds among
    members develop as well and generate their own source of cohesion.
34. B. Aubrey Fisher, Small Group Decision Making, second edition (New
    York: McGraw-Hill, 1980), chap. 7.
35. Edwin P. Hollander, Leadership Dynamics: A Practical Guide to Effective
    Relationships (New York: Free Press, 1978).
36. For a sociological analysis of power and authority, see Jeffrey Pfeffer,
    Power in Organizations (Boston: Pitman, 1981); and Jeffrey Pfeffer, Man-
    aging with Power (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1992).
37. The debate among economists within agency theory about "principal-
    agent slack" parallels the long-standing debate among political scientists
    between situationaVinstitutional determinists and "great-man" theorists
    and biographers, as noted earlier (note 15, Chapter 1). Are people captured
    by their institutions (and constituents) or do they act, to varying degrees,
    independently of them, occasionally challenging them? In attempting to
    bridge this debate, the social psychologist, Edwin Hollander, in Leadership
    Dynamics, used the term "idiosyncrasy credits" to refer to the political
    capital (informal authority) accrued by an authority figure by meeting
    many of the expectations of constituents. The capital can be spent on
    creative activity deviant from expectations. Thus, as we see everyday in
    politics, an authority figure will meet some expectations and frustrate
    others without losing office. Sometimes she satisfies and frustrates the same
    constituents, and sometimes she trades off different constituencies, satisfy-
    ing one and frustrating another. This provides for slack within authorizing
    relationships that carry a complex bundle of expectations. For an intro-
    duction to this debate within agency theory, see Morris P. Fiorina and
    Kenneth A. Shepsle, "Formal Theories of Leadership: Agents, Agenda
    Setters, and Entrepreneurs," in Bryan D. Jones, ed., Leadership and Poli-
    tics: New Perspectives in Political Science (Lawrence, KS: University Press
    of Kansas, 1989), pp. 17-40; Kevin B. Grier, ed., "Empirical Studies of
    Ideology and Representation in American Politics," Public Choice, vol. 76,
    June 1993 (entire issue); Joseph P. Kalt and Mark A. Zupan, "The Appar-
    ent Ideological Behavior of Legislators: Testing for Principal-Agent Slack
                                              Notes to Pages 58-60 I 301

    in Political Institutions," Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 33, April
    1990, pp. 103-131; and Joseph P. Kalt and Mark A. Zupan, "Capture
    and Ideology in the Economic Theory of Politics," The American Eco-
    nomic Review, vol. 74, June 1984, pp. 279-300.
38. Some scholars disagree. David Easton applies the term authority broadly
    to cover all "command-obedience" relationships; thus, a thief with a gun
    has authority over his victim, although the victim would challenge the
    legitimacy of that authority. His distinction turns on legitimacy. David A.
    Easton, A Systems Analysis of Political Life (New York: Wiley, 1965),
    p.208.
39. The classic studies on habitual deference were performed by Milgram.
    They are reported in Stanley Milgram, "Some Conditions of Obedience
    and Disobedience to Authority," Human Relations, vol. 18, 1965, pp. 57-
    76. For an expansion and application of Milgram's themes, see Herbert C.
    Kelman and V. Lee Hamilton, Crimes of Obedience: Toward a Social
    Psychology of Authority and Responsibility (New Haven: Yale University
    Press, 1989).
40. Numerous efforts have been made to assess levels of "maturity" among
    members of organizations, including characteristics like motivation to
    achieve, ability and willingness to take responsibility, and inclinations
    toward dependency. See Loren I. Moore, "The FMI: Dimensions of Fol-
    lower Maturity," Group and Organizational Studies, vol. 1, 1976,
    pp. 203-222; Paul Hersey and Kenneth Blanchard, Management of Or-
    ganizational Behavior: Utilizing Human Resources (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
    Prentice-Hall, 1977); and Robert Kegan and Lisa Laskow Lahey, "Adult
    Leadership and Adult Development: A Constructionist View," in Barbara
    Kellerman, ed., Leadership: Multidisciplinary Perspectives (Englewood
    Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984), pp. 199-230.
41. Margaret J. Rioch, '''All We Like Sheep-' [Isaiah 53:6]: Followers and
    Leaders," in Colman and Bexton, eds., Group Relations Reader, p. 175.
42. For an economic analysis of the role of the state in protecting public goods
    as well as market institutions like property rights, see "A Neoclassical
    Theory of the State," in Douglass C. North, Structure and Change in
    Economic History (New York: Norton, 1981), chap. 3.
43. Mikhail Gorbachev, Perestroika: New Thinking for Our Country and the
    World, updated edition (New York: PerenniallHarper and Row, 1988),
    p.52.
44. See "Leadership in the Gang," in Frederick M. Thrasher, The Gang: A
    Study of 1,313 Gangs in Chicago, second revised edition (Chicago: Uni-
    versity of Chicago Press, 1936), chap. 43, for a vivid description of the
    kinds of power-for-service exchange that takes place between members and
    heads of gangs.
45. See Janine Ludlam, "Reform and the Redefinition of the Social Contract
302   /   Notes to Pages 61-62

    under Gorbachev," World Politics, vol. 43, January 1991, pp. 284-312;
    and Erich Fromm, Escape from Freedom (New York: Rinehart, 1941).
46. One can say that the trade-off was between various forms of freedom, for
    example, political and economic freedom versus freedom from insecurity
    and deprivation. This argument is analogous to Amartya Sen's analysis of
    various forms of equality. See "Equality of What?" in Amartya Sen, In-
    equality Reexamined (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1992),
    chap. 1.
47. See Lessnoff's Social Contract for a history of social contract theory.
    Among other things in his treatment, he provides a history of the bargains
    reached between rulers and ruled, from ancient times through feudal ar-
    rangements to the current age. Also see Vincente Medina, Social Contract
    Theories: Political Obligation or Anarchy? (Savage, MD: Rowman and
    Littlefield, 1990); and Ron Replogle, Recovering the Social Contract (Sav-
    age, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1989).
48. "Typically, in political systems, at least in those in which the political
    authorities are not being fundamentally challenged, the capacity of the
    authorities to rule is closely connected to the presence of an ingrained
    belief, usually transmitted across the generations in the socialization proc-
    esses, that the occupants of the political authority roles have a right to
    command and the other members of the system a duty to obey. The major
    source of power for these roles resides in the prevalence of the conviction
    of their legitimacy." Easton, A Systems Analysis of Political Life, p. 208.
49. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, The Social Contract and Discourses, written in
    1762 (London: Dent, 1973). In fact, Rousseau and many others believed
    they were providing an accurate account of the genesis of authority struc-
    tures, and not simply a dramatic vehicle for presenting an aspiration. For
    a critique, see Fred H. Willhoite Jr., "Primates and Political Authority: A
    Biobehavioral Perspective," American Political Science Review, vol. 70,
    December 1976, pp. 1110-1126, who uses an analysis of primate social
    systems to counter the supposition of Hobbes, Rousseau, and Locke that
    people in some "original" state were at one time free of authority struc-
    tures.
50. As Freud put it, "A great change takes place [in our ability to construct
    civilizations] only when the authority is internalized through the estab-
    lishment of the super-ego." Civilization and Its Discontents, p. 80. Also
    see Jerome H. Barkow, "Attention Structure and the Evolution of Human
    Psychological Characteristics," in Chance and Larsen, eds., The Social
    Structure of Attention, pp. 206-209, for a discussion of how the capacity
    to internalize representations of authority enables an economy of attention.
51. The idea that individuals "contain" groups of internalized representations
    of those people and aspects of people that have been significant in their
    lives has its roots in Freudian psychology, which then gave rise to object
                                               Notes to Pages 62-63       I 303

    relations theory and ego psychology. In 1921, Freud wrote, "The contrast
     between individual psychology and social or group psychology, which at
    a first glance may seem to be full of significance, loses a great deal of its
    sharpness when it is examined more closely. It is true that individual
    psychology is concerned with the individual man and explores the paths
    by which he seeks to find satisfaction for his instinctual impulses; but only
    rarely and under certain exceptional conditions is individual psychology
    in a position to disregard the relations of this individual to others. In the
    individual's mental life someone else is invariably involved, as a model, as
    an object, as a helper, as an opponent; and so from the very first individual
    psychology, in this extended but entirely justifiable sense of the words, is
    at the same time social psychology as well." Freud, Group Psychology and
    the Analysis of the Ego, p. 1. For an introduction to object relations theory,
    see Melanie Klein, "Our Adult World and Its Roots in Infancy," Human
    Relations, vol. 12, 1959, pp. 291-303; reprinted in Colman and Geller,
    eds., Group Relations Reader 2, pp. 1-19; and Otto F. Kernberg, Object
    Relations Theory and Clinical Psychoanalysis (New York: Jason Aronson,
    1976). For an introduction to ego psychology, see Heinz Hartmann, Ego
    Psychology and the Problem of Adaptation (New York: International
    Universities Press, 1958); and Erik Erikson, Childhood and Society (New
    York: Norton, 1950).
52. Ants can also achieve very large societies of up to 20 million members. In
    contrast to human organization, however, ant organization is based not
    upon a flexible set of learned and evolving norms and rules but upon a
    rigid set of genetically programmed behaviors. See Burt Holldobler and
    Edward O. Wilson, The Ants (Cambridge: BelknaplHarvard University
    Press, 1990).
53. The concept of norms replacing authority is applied to the international
    system by Robert Keohane. He suggests that in the absence of a hegemon
    (a dominant world power), key hegemonic coordinating functions could
    be performed by a set of multilateral institutions and international regimes.
    That is, institutions and regimes may be able to function in place of a
    hegemon to facilitate cooperation if they are able to furnish a sense of
    certainty and confidence in the system formally provided by hegemonic
    authority. See Robert Keohane, After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord
    in the World Political Economy (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
    1984); see also note 90, Chapter 7, below.
54. David B. Truman, The Governmental Process (New York: Knopf, 1951),
    p.194.
55. For a discussion of how intact networks of civic engagement enable socie-
    ties to meet an ongoing stream of adaptive problems, see Robert Putnam,
    Making Democracy Work. Putnam's study of Italy explains the divergent
    political and economic experiences of the northern and southern regions
304   I   Notes to Pages 63-65

    in terms of the degree to which each exhibits civic values-political equal-
    ity, civic engagement, solidarity, trust, tolerance, cooperation, and honesty.
    Northern Italy, which exhibits a much higher degree of civic values, also
    has a more effective and democratic system of governance than does the
    South (p. 115). Putnam explains the self-reinforcing dynamics of the un-
    civic communities prevailing in southern Italy in terms of game theory:
    "The strategy of 'never cooperate' is a stable equilibrium, for reasons that
    are well explicated in standard accounts of the prisoner's dilemma. Once
    trapped in this situation, no matter how exploitative and backward, it is
    irrational for any individual to seek a more collaborative alternative,
    except perhaps within the immediate family" (p. 177).
56. According to Levi-Strauss, a system of chieftainship or headship seems
    always to exist in traditional societies. Claude Levi-Strauss, "The Nam-
    bikuara of Northwestern Mato Grosso," in Ronald Cohen and John Mid-
    dleton, eds., Comparative Political Systems: Studies in the Politics of
    Pre-Industrial Societies (Garden City, NY: Natural History Press, 1967),
    p.25.
57. See Lorna Marshall, "!Kung Bushman Bands," in Cohen and Middleton,
    eds., Comparative Political Systems (Garden City, NY: The Natural His-
    tory Press, 1967), pp. 15-43. The !Kung are a hunter-gatherer society, and
    as such may provide insight into the ways human beings lived during most
    of our history.
58. Indeed, when the headman of the Gura band died without leaving any kin
    to succeed him, the band went on without a headman for at least two
    years (at which time the observers left the country). Marshall, "!Kung
    Bushman Bands," p. 38.
59. Ibid., p. 39.
60. Max Weber, On Charisma and Institution Building, ed. S. N. Eisenstadt
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968), chap. 5.
61. For both a broad and in-depth view of charisma, see Jay A. Conger and
    Rabindra N. Kanungo, eds., Charismatic Leadership: The Illusive Factor
    in Organizational Effectiveness (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1988).
62. See Harrison M. Trice and Janice M. Beyer, "Charisma and Its Routini-
    zation in Two Social Movement Organizations," in Barry M. Staw and
    L. L. Cummings, eds., Research in Organizational Behavior, vol. 8 (Green-
    wich, CN: JAI Press, 1986), pp. 113-164.
63. Weber called this Amtcharisma, the charisma of the office. See Weber, On
    Charisma, p. xxi.
64. The literature on stress and the emergence of leadership shows a strong
    correlation between the degree of distress experienced by a group and the
    style of behavior they authorize. In more routine contexts authority can
    be exercised less directly, more participatively, but in times of crisis a group
    will often withdraw authorization from a person who maintains a partici-
                                             Notes to Pages 65-66       I 305

    pative style, and it will then invest authority in someone who is directive,
    who makes quick, forceful decisions. See "Stress and Leadership," in Bass,
    Bass and Stogdill's Handbook of Leadership, chap. 29.
65. See Edward Shils, "Charisma, Order, and Status," American Sociological
    Review, vol. 30, April 1965.
66. Cited in Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., The Coming of the New Deal (Boston:
    Houghton Mifflin, 1958), pp. 1-2. For an analysis of the context and
    sources of Roosevelt's charisma, see Ann Ruth Willner, The Spellbinders:
    Charismatic Political Leadership (New Haven: Yale University Press,
    1984), pp. 111-117, 153-171.
67. See Max Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic Organization, ed.
    Talcott Parsons (New York: Free Press, 1964); Max Weber, On Charisma
    and Institution Building, p. 18; and Sidney Hook, The Hero in History
    (New York: John Day, 1943).
68. J. o. Hertzler, "Crises and Dictatorships," American Sociological Review,
    vol. 5, 1940, pp. 157-169.
69. See Mauk Mulder and Ad Stemerding, "Threat, Attraction to Group and
    Need for Strong Leadership," Human Relations, vol. 16,1963, pp. 317-
    334. For a comparative analysis of this dynamic, see Richard H. Dekmejian
    and Margaret J. Wyszomirski, "Charismatic Leadership in Islam: The
    Mahdi of the Sudan," Comparative Studies in Society and History, vol.
    14, 1972,pp. 195-214.
70. Adolf Hitler, "In Behalf of Christ" (Munich: Voelkischer Beobachter, April
    12, 1922), cited in Gordon Prange, ed., Hitler's Words (Washington, DC:
    American Council on Public Affairs, 1944).
71. The perception of Churchill's charisma at the start of the war changed
    when the war was over; likewise, Roosevelt seemed far less magical to the
    nation during his second term than during the acute national emergency
    of his first. Tucker, "The Theory of Charismatic Leadership," p. 744. Of
    course, the person who gains charismatic authority has to have the per-
    sonal skills and capacity to receive these projections. Not just anybody can
    step into the role. See Willner, The Spellbinders, pp. 59-171. For analyses
    of the contextual determinants of charisma, see H. H. Gerth and C. Wright
    Mills, eds., From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology (New York: Oxford
    University Press, 1946), pp. 245-252; Tucker, "The Theory of Charismatic
    Leadership," pp. 731-756; Irvine Schiffer, Charisma (Toronto: University
    of Toronto Press, 1973); Rioch, '''All We Like Sheep," in Colman and
    Bexton, eds., Group Relations Reader, pp. 159-177; Jerrold M. Post,
    "Narcissism and the Charismatic Leader-Follower Relationship," Political
    Psychology, vol. 7, 1986, pp. 675-688; and James G. Hunt, B. Rajaram
    Baliga, H. Peter Dachler, and Chester A. Schriesheim, eds., Emerging
    Leadership Vistas (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1988), pp. 5-83. On
306   I Notes to Pages 66-69

    Hitler, see Robert C. Tucker, Politics as Leadership (Columbia, Missouri:
    University of Missouri Press, 1981), pp. 89-97.
72. In his study of Latin American economic development, Albert Hirschman
    suggests that one of the attitudinal changes required for development is
    the perception that progress is being made by the society, and that skilled
    rather than charismatic leadership may be required to change that attitude,
    particularly if charismatic authority is based on the "leader's ability 'to
    accentuate the sense of being in a desperate predicament.'" Albert o.
    Hirschman, "Underdevelopment, Obstacles to the Perception of Change,
    and Leadership," Daedalus, vol. 97, summer 1968, pp. 925-937; and
    Hirschman quoting Tucker, "The Theory of Charismatic Leadership,"
    p.751.
73. Elliott Jaques, Requisite Organization: The CEO's Guide to Creative
    Structure and Leadership (Arlington, VA: Cason Hall, 1989), p. 122.


                       4. Mobilizing Adaptive Work
 1. For an example, see Floyd Alwon, "Response to Agencywide Crisis: A
    Model for Administrative Action," Child Welfare, vol. 59, June 1980,
    pp. 335-346. For an introduction to organizational studies of executive
    functions, see Chester Barnard's two volumes, The Functions of the Ex-
    ecutive (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1938), and Organiza-
    tion and Management (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1948);
    Philip Selznick, Leadership in Administration (Berkeley: University of Cali-
    fornia Press, 1984); Daniel Katz and Robert L. Kahn, The Social Psychol-
    ogy of Organizations, second edition (New York: Wiley, 1978); Edwin P.
    Hollander, Leadership Dynamics: A Practical Guide to Effective Relation-
    ships (New York: Free Press, 1978); Leonard Sayles, Leadership: What
    Effective Managers Really Do ... And How They Do It (New York:
    McGraw-Hill, 1979); and Thomas Gilmore, "Leadership and Boundary
    Management," Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, vol. 18, 1982,
    pp. 343-356. Many studies of executive functioning tend to equate lead-
    ership with the fulfillment of the social functions of authority. They have
    relevance to the uses of authority to accomplish adaptive change, but they
    do not focus on this process per see
 2. What I have identified as the social functions of authority (direction,
    protection, orientation, conflict control, and norm maintenance) are analo-
    gous to what political economists term the reduction of transaction costs
    (for example, costs to monitoring and enforcing agreements) and uncer-
    tainties critical to cooperation and collective action. See Douglass C.
    North, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance
    (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990), pp. 48-51.
                                               Notes to Pages 70-86        I 307

 3. David A. Easton, A Systems Analysis of Political Life (New York: Wiley,
     1965), p. 213.
 4. The names in this vignette are changed to protect privacy.
 5. See "Substitutes for Leadership," in Bernard M. Bass, Bass and Stogdill's
    Handbook of Leadership, third edition (New York: Free Press, 1990),
    pp. 682-686.
 6. For a psychoanalytic view of the dependency dynamic, see Wilfred R. Bion,
    Experiences in Groups (New York: Basic Books, 1961); and Edward R.
    Shapiro and A. Wesley Carr, Lost in Familiar Places (New Haven: Yale
    University Press, 1991), pp. 67-69, 124, and 157-177.
 7. See Peter R. Andreas, Eva C. Bertram, Morris ]. Blachman, and Kenneth
    E. Sharpe, "Dead-End Drug Wars," Foreign Policy, vol. 85, winter 1991,
    pp. 106-128.
 8. According to a national poll of 1,000 people, taken for this study in
    September 1993 by pollster Gerry Chervinsky, consultant to The Boston
     Globe, 860/0 of Americans know of Manuel Noriega; 65% know if they
    have a mayor and know his or her name; 58% know of Pablo Escobar;
    450/0 know of Medellin; and 28% "have any information or know any-
    thing" about their local drug treatment facility.
 9. For a discussion of how the demands upon the authority figure's role
    increase with the size of a group, see John K. Hemphill, "Relations between
    the Size of the Group and the Behavior of 'Superior' Leaders," Journal of
    Social Psychology, vol. 32, 1950, pp. 11-22. In regard to attacking or
    replacing authority figures, see Muzafer Sherif and Carolyn Sherif, Groups
    in Harmony and Tension (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1953),
    pp. 199-202; Robert Hamblin, "Leadership and Crises," Sociometry, vol.
    21, December 1958, pp. 322-335; and David Korten, "Situational Deter-
    minants of Leadership Structure," in Dorwin Cartwright and Alvin Zan-
    der, eds., Group Dynamics: Research and Theory, third edition (New York:
    Harper and Row, 1968), pp. 351-361.
10. This case is disguised to protect privacy.
11. See Plato, The Republic, trans. Cornford (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    1941), chaps. 2 and 3; Renford Bambrough, "Plato's Political Analogies,"
    in Peter Laslett, ed., Philosophy, Politics, and Society, 1st sere (Oxford:
    BlackwelVOxford University Press, 1956); and Robert C. Tucker, Politics
    as Leadership (Columbia, Missouri: University of Missouri Press, 1981),
    pp. 1-3.
12. By technical expertise, I am generally referring to substantive expertise.
    Clearly, process expertise is also technical, in the sense that it consists of
    techniques. The purpose of this study, in fact, is to improve the technical
    expertise required to lead people through processes of adaptive change.
13. Robert Tucker suggests that "The validity of definitions of the situation
    may be a matter of degree. There is a possibility, theoretical if not practical
308   /   Notes to Pages 86-97

    in any particular case, of a more inclusive diagnosis that would make room
    for some, if not all, of the purposes and concerns of both sides." Tucker,
    Politics as Leadership~ p. 53.
14. See Thomas C. Schelling, "Climatic Change: Implications for Welfare and
    Policy," in the National Academy of Sciences study, Changing Climate:
    Report of the Carbon Dioxide Assessment Committee (Washington, DC:
    National Academy Press, 1983), pp. 449-482; and more recently John
    Broome, Counting the Cost of Global Warming (Cambridge, England:
    White Horse Press, 1992), chaps. 1 and 2, who refutes Schelling based on
    more recent scientific findings.
15. This illustration is based primarily on Henry Lee and Esther Scott, "Man-
    aging Environmental Risk: The Case of Asarco" (Cambridge: John F.
    Kennedy School of Government Case Program, Harvard University, 1985),
    Case #C16-88-847. Quotations, unless otherwise noted, are taken from
    this study.
16. Barnett Kalikow, "Environmental Risk: Power to the People," Technology
    Review, vol. 87, October 1984, p. 57.
17. William Ruckelshaus, "Letter: On Tacoma's Air-How E.P.A. Faces the
    Arsenic Risk," The New York Times~ July 23, 1983, p. 22.
18. Personal communication, William Ruckelshaus, March 1992.
19. Personal communication, Colin Conant, June 1993.
20. Personal communication, Doug Sutherland, County Executive, Pierce
    County, WA; June 1993.
21. Personal communication, Professor Lawrence Susskind, MIT, February
    1992.
22. One of the effects of this distinction was to broaden the scope of risk
    assessment, generating comparative risk assessments of communities and
    regions across the United States. Personal communication, Clark Goulding,
    Visiting Senior Lecturer, University of Washington; and former Chief, Air
    Program Branch, Region 10, EPA; June 1993. For discussions of this
    change, see Mark K. Landy, Marc J. Roberts, and Stephen R. Thomas,
    The Environmental Protection Agency: Asking the Wrong Questions (New
    York: Oxford University Press, 1990), pp. 258-259; and the report spon-
    sored by Lee Thomas, the EPA Administrator from 1985-1989: Environ-
    mental Protection Agency, Office of Policy Planning and Evaluation,
    Unfinished Business: A Comparative Assessment of Environmental Prob-
    lems~ Overview Report (Washington, DC: Environmental Protection
    Agency, 1987). The quarterly journal of the EPA has provided periodic
    analyses of the distinction between risk assessment and risk management
    in the ongoing development of the Agency's mission. For example, see
    "Profiles in Risk Assessment: New Science, New Contexts," EPA Journal~
    vol. 19, no. 1, 1993.
                                           Notes to Pages 97-102       /   309

23. Robert B. Reich, Public Management in a Democratic Society (Englewood-
    Cliffs, Nl: Prentice-Hall, 1990), p. 171.
24. There is, of course, a rich literature on the dynamics of plant closings in
    the United States, although it is weighted heavily toward studies on the
    outcome of workers rather than the outcome of the community as a whole.
    For an introduction to this literature, see Jeanne P. Gordus, Paul Jarley,
    and Louis A. Ferman, Plant Closings and Economic Dislocation (Kalama-
    zoo, MI: W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1981). For
    studies that include accounts of community outcomes, see Robert L. Aron-
    son and Robert B. McKersie, Economic Consequences of Plant Shutdowns:
    Final Report (Ithaca, NY: New York State School of Industrial and Labor
    Relations, Cornell University, 1980); David Bensman and Roberta Lynch,
    Rusted Dreams: Hard Times in a Steel Community (New York: McGraw-
    Hill, 1987); Gregory Pappas, The Magic City: Unemployment in a Work-
    ing Class Community (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989); Lloyd
    Rodwin and Hidehiko Sazanami, eds., Deindustrialization and Regional
    Economic Transformation: The Experience of the United States (Boston:
    Unwin Hyman, 1989); and Peter B. Doeringer, et aI., Turbulence in the
    American Workplace (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991).
25. Cited in Robert B. Reich, "Policy Making in a Democracy," in Robert B.
    Reich, ed., The Power of Public Ideas (Cambridge: Harvard University
    Press, 1990), pp. 149-150.


                             5. Applying Power
 1. This distinction is similar to the distinction drawn between headship and
    leadership, where headship is equated with the formal powers of office
    (formal authority), and leadership with informal influence (informal
    authority). In my terms, although both formal and informal authority
    might be used as tools in the exercise of leadership, neither constitute
    leadership per see The headship/leadership model does not help us focus
    on the task of adaptive work because it uses influence and formal authority
    as its units of analysis. For discussions of the distinction between formal
    powers and informal influence (or headship and leadership), see Richard
    E. Neustadt, Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents: The Politics
    of Leadership from Roosevelt to Reagan, third edition (New York: Free
    Press, 1990); Cecil A. Gibb, "Leadership," in Gardner Lindzey and Elliot
    Aronson, eds., The Handbook of Social Psychology, second edition (Read-
    ing, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1969), vol. 4, pp. 212-213; and Jean Blondel,
    Political Leadership: Towards a General Analysis (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage,
    1987), pp. 13-15.
 2. See "Public Prestige," in Neustadt, Presidential Power, chap. 5.
310/    Notes to Pages 104-110

3. See Donald Winnieott, The Maturational Process (New York: International
   Universities Press, 1965); Arnold H. Modell, "The 'Holding Environment'
   and the Therapeutic Action of Psychoanalysis," Journal of the American
   Psychological Association, vol. 24, 1976, pp. 285-307; Edward R.
   Shapiro, "The Holding Environment and Family Therapy with Acting Out
   Adolescents," International Journal of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, vol.
   9, 1982, pp. 209-226; Robert Kegan, The Evolving Self (Cambridge:
   Harvard University Press, 1982); and Edward R. Shapiro and A. Wesley
   Carr, Lost in Familiar Places (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1991).
4. For a discussion of the uses and misuses of prisons as holding environments
   to produce developmental change, see Kegan, The Evolving Self, pp. 175-
   177.
5. See David Good, "Individuals, Interpersonal Relations, and Trust," in
   Diego Gambetta, ed., Trust (Oxford: Blackwell, 1988), p. 32. For an
   organizational study of trust, see John J. Gabarro, "The Development of
   Trust, Influence, and Expectations," in Anthony G. Athos and John J.
   Gabarro, Interpersonal Behavior: Communication and Understanding in
   Relationships (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1978), pp. 290-303;
   and John J. Gabarro, The Dynamics of Taking Charge (Boston: Harvard
   Business School Press, 1987), chap. 5.
6. For example, dogs subjected to small but random electric shocks become
   listless compared with dogs receiving large but predictable shocks. Martin
   E. P. Seligman, Steven F. Maier, and Richard L. Solomon, "Unpredictable
   and Uncontrollable Aversive Events," in F. Robert Brush, ed., Aversive
   Conditioning and Learning (New York: Academic Press, 1971); also see
   Good, "Individuals, Interpersonal Relations, and Trust."
7. Diego Gambetta, "Mafia: The Price of Distrust," in Gambetta, ed., Trust,
   pp. 162-163. Also see Anthony Pagden, "The Destruction of Trust and
   Its Economic Consequences in the Case of Eighteenth-Century Naples," in
   the same volume, pp. 127-141; Robert D. Putnam, Making Democracy
   Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy (Princeton: Princeton University
   Press, 1993), pp. 146-148, 167-180.
8. This discussion begins to introduce the skills and temperament that one
   would want to strengthen in any leadership development effort. A treat-
   ment of this subject awaits another volume.
9. This dynamic can be analyzed further. The doctor, by drawing attention
   to her own well-being, distracts the family from the work itself. And the
   distraction generates distrust by the following mechanism. People have
   ambivalent feelings about adaptive work: they want to make progress on
   hard problems, but they also want to avoid the associated distress. Con-
   sequently, the Buchanans might have welcomed the doctor's distraction as
   an escape from their problems and, at the same time, they might have been
                                           Notes to Pages 110-123        /   311

    annoyed with the doctor for her implicit breach of contract: "We are the
    patients. We are supposed to be cared for here, not you."
10. Speech delivered at the John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
    University, January 1981.
11. Personal Communication, Ernesta Barnes Ballard, March 1993. For an
    in-depth discussion of the role of public involvement in environmental risk
    management, see the National Academy of Sciences study, Improving Risk
    Communication (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1989).
12. Personal communication, Alex Smith, former Director of the Hazardous
    Waste, Air and Water Division, Region 10 (Seattle), EPA; April 1993. As
    she put it incredulously at the time of Ruckelshaus' directive, "We're going
    to do public workshops on NISHAPS [this kind of regulation]?"
13. The reasons why Ruckelshaus chose risk management are, of course,
    complex. He might also have chosen the issue of acid rain, or ozone
    depletion, both of which were getting a lot of public attention (acid rain
    more than ozone). But the White House had no interest in pursuing these
    issues, while it approved the notion of risk management. Although Ruckel-
    shaus' authority gave him some power to frame the public debate, his
    authorization from above constrained him within clear boundaries. See
    Landy, Roberts, and Thomas, The Environmental Protection Agency,
    pp. 252-258.
14. Without the benefit of historical perspective, I would pursue the logic of
    this argument with the following questions about President Clinton's strat-
    egy. Did he see the issue of gays in the military as an adaptive problem or
    a technical problem for which authoritative action might make perfect
    sense? The latter assessment would have been a fairly obvious mistake.
    The ban on gays in the military posed an adaptive challenge, both for the
    institution of the military and for the nation as a whole, requiring funda-
    mental changes in institutional norms and procedures and public attitudes
    and habits. But if the President knew that this was an adaptive challenge,
    did he know that this issue was also unripe? And if so, was bold action
    meant to ripen this issue? Clearly, there are alternatives to ripening issues
    by bold authoritative action. Were these considered in light of the costs to
    him in terms of attention to other issues and informal authority?
15. Personal communication, Susan Hall, the consultant in charge of designing
    the public involvement process in Tacoma for the EPA; April 1993.
16. As mentioned in an earlier note, for a thought-provoking analysis of
    various decisionmaking modes and when to use them, see Victor Vroom
    and Arthur Jago, The New Leadership: Managing Participation in Organi-
    zations (Englewood-Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1988).
17. Personal communication, William Ruckelshaus, March 1992.
312   I   Notes to Pages 123-129

18. William Ruckelshaus, "Letter: On Tacoma's Air-How EPA Faces the
    Arsenic Risk," The New York Times, July 23, 1983, italics in the original.


                            6. On a Razor's Edge
 1. See "Leader or Clerk?" in Richard E. Neustadt, Presidential Power and
    the Modern Presidents: The Politics of Leadership from Roosevelt to
    Reagan, third edition (New York: Free Press, 1990), chap. 1; and Warren
    Bennis, Why Leaders Can't Lead: The Unconscious Conspiracy Continues
    (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1989).
 2. Robert D. Putnam's study, Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in
    Modern Italy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993), shows a strong
    positive correlation between institutions of civic engagement (for example,
    soccer clubs, choral societies, and literary guilds) and community perfor-
    mance (for example, economic development, legislative innovation, and
    bureaucratic responsiveness).
 3. For example, many scholars attribute the greatness of George Washington
    to his foresight and ability to strengthen the central government in its first
    years. Washington placed highest priority on increasing the federal gov-
    ernment's credibility and prestige. He did so by staying out of "entangling
    alliances" (during the French Revolution), displaying overwhelming mili-
    tary power (the Whiskey Rebellion), and maintaining the financial solvency
    of the government (by supporting Hamilton's proposal to fund the debt).
    Richard Ellis and Aaron Wildavsky describe this as "substituting the ap-
    pearance of power for the reality of power," which I think confuses the
    difference between formal powers and informal authority. The source of
    the government's informal authority lay in perceptions of credibility. That
    does not make it unreal; it simply suggests that trust is a major source of
    informal and ultimately formal authorization. In my terms, Washington
    aimed to strengthen the holding environment provided by central govern-
    ment, and this boosted critically the government's power to hold the nation
    together through its stage of infancy. See Richard Ellis and Aaron
    Wildavsky, "'Greatness' Revisited: Evaluating the Performance of Early
    American Presidents in Terms of Cultural Dilemmas," Presidential Studies
    Quarterly, vol. 21, winter 1991, pp. 18-22.
      Also see Chapters 4 and 5, above, for the example of Ruckelshaus and
    his efforts to restore the credibility of the EPA as a mediating institution
    in the society on environmental issues.
 4. For a discussion of the relationship between empowerment and the disper-
    sion of authority, see Herbert C. Kelman and V. Lee Hamilton, Crimes of
    Obedience: Toward a Social Psychology of Authority and Responsibility
    (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1989), pp. 322-327.
 5. I use the term black American instead of the contemporary phrase Afri-
                                           Notes to Pages 130-133       I   313

    can-American because this case takes place in the 1960s, a time when the
    term black American was becoming an authentic expression of the demand
    for equality and respect.
 6. Quotations from Doris Kearns, Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream
    (New York: New American Library, 1976), pp. 180-181.
 7. Ibid., pp. 184-185.
 8. It is, of course, hard to say which of Johnson's successes matters most. As
    Joseph Califano summarizes, "Johnson changed the country more than
    most of us realize. By the time he left office, he had pushed through
    Congress Medicare and Medicaid to provide health care for the aged and
    most of the poor; funds for preschool, elementary, secondary, and higher
    education; air, water, and noise pollution laws; measures to preserve land;
    civil rights legislation; food stamps for the needy; a massive housing bill,
    and a score of consumer-protection laws. He had articulated the concept
    of affirmative action, dramatized the blight of poverty amid unprecedented
    wealth, signed the Freedom of Information Act, and created the National
    Endowments for the Arts and Humanities, the John F. Kennedy Center for
    the Performing Arts, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, several
    cabinet departments and agencies, and he changed the role of the federal
    government in American life." Joseph A. Califano Jr., The Triumph and
    Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson: The White House Years (New York: Simon
    and Schuster, 1991), p. 12.
 9. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson~ p. 239.
10. The exception was Eisenhower's 1957 Civil Rights Act which survived the
    Senate because Senate Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson, eyeing his 1960
    run for the presidency, got it passed. See Robert Dallek, Lone Star Rising:
    Lyndon Johnson and His Times: 1908-1960 (New York: Oxford Univer-
    sity Press, 1991), pp. 517-528.
11. Quotations from Richard N. Goodwin, Remembering America (Boston:
    Little, Brown, 1988), pp. 313, 314, italics added.
12. Quotations from Kearns, Lyndon Johnson~ p. 194.
13. Robert A. Caro, The Years of Lyndon Johnson: Means of Ascent (New
    York: Vintage Books, 1990), p. xvi.
14. Cited in Califano, The Triumph and Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson~ p. 53.
15. "Troopers Rout Selma Marchers," The Washington Post~ March 8, 1965,
    p. Al.
16. Caro, Means of Ascent, p. xv; and J. L. Chestnut Jr., and Julia Cass, Black
    in Selma: The Uncommon Life of J. L. Chestnut~ Jr. (Farrar, Straus and
    Giroux, 1990), p. 207.
17. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson~ p. 239. The National Guard consists of troops
    normally under the command of the various state governors. "Calling out
    the national guard" consists of federalizing these troops, which then fall
    under the President's command.
314   I   Notes to Pages 133-136

18. "King is Dismayed by u.s. 'Timidity,'" The Washington Post, March 8,
    1965, p. A2.
19. Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954) (Brown I). For a
    summary, see Laurence H. Tribe, American Constitutional Law, second
    edition (Mineola, NY: The Foundation Press, 1988), pp. 1474-1480.
20. Dallek, Lone Star Rising, pp. 521-522.
21. According to Califano, "On February 9, 1965, the President met with
    Martin Luther King at the White House to hear a report on King's cam-
    paign to register blacks to vote in Selma, the capital of Dallas County,
    Alabama. As a political leader preparing to persuade Congress to pass a
    voting rights bill, Johnson appreciated King's choice of Selma ... Johnson
    told King that he would soon send voting-rights legislation to Congress.
    He thought that the public pressure of Selma would help and hoped there
    would be no violence." Califano, The Triumph and Tragedy of Lyndon
    Johnson, p. 55.
22. For example, in 1941 the civil rights movement threatened a massive
    march on Washington to demand equal opportunity for the jobs, both
    civilian and military, created as the country geared up for World War II.
    The threat of the march forced Roosevelt, two weeks before the target
    date, to issue an Executive Order promoting fair employment practices.
    The march was then called off. See Thomas R. Brooks, Walls Come
    Tumbling Down: A History of the Civil Rights Movement 1940-1970
    (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1974).
23. "Trooper's Rout Selma Marchers with Tear Gas," The Washington Post,
    March 8, 1965, p. A3.
24. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, p. 209.
25. Lyndon B. Johnson, The Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency
    1963-1969 (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971), p. 162.
26. Ralph David Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down (New York:
    Harper and Row, 1989), p. 334.
27. I discuss the events and tactics of this moment in greater depth in Chapter
    9. I do not think Johnson intended to stop the Selma demonstrations
    altogether, but once the federal court order had been issued, he was
    obligated to slow King down. Had King broken the law, Johnson would
    have been forced to take action against King, and both Johnson's and
    King's strategies would have backfired. See Abernathy, And the Walls
    Came Tumbling Down, pp. 335-342.
28. "President's Statement," The Washington Post, March 10, 1965, p. A3.
29. See James Henderson, Philip B. Heymann, Richard E. Neustadt, Glenn
    Reichardt, and Mark H. Moore, "Voting Rights Act of 1965 (B): LBJ and
    the Department of Justice" (Cambridge: John F. Kennedy School of Gov-
    ernment Case Program, Harvard University, 1975), Case #694-75-114.
                                           Notes to Pages 137-142       I   315

30. "Cleric's Death Saddens Selma Crowd," The Washington Post, March 12,
    1965, p. A8; Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down, p. 325.
31. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 239.
32. Goodwin, Remembering America, p. 320.
33. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 239.
34. Goodwin, Remembering America, p. 323.
35. "Transcript of News Conference at the White House," The Washington
    Post, March 14, 1965, p. A12.
36. "Crowd of 15,000 at Lafayette Park Protests Federal Inaction in Selma,"
    The Washington Post, March 15, 1965, p. A6; Caro, Means of Ascent,
    p. xviii; and Goodwin, Remembering America, p. 324.
37. Some of the consequences of federal initiatives in civil rights have now
    been studied a generation later. The consequences are impressive. For an
    analysis linking structural to attitudinal change, see Thomas F. Pettigrew,
    "Advancing Racial Justice: Past Lessons for Future Use," in Harry J.
    Knopke, Robert J. Norrell, and Ronald W. Rogers, eds., Opening Doors:
    Perspectives on Race Relations in Contemporary America (Tuscaloosa, AL:
    University of Alabama Press, 1991), pp. 165-178. For an in-depth case
    study of an integrated public middle school as a vehicle for attitudinal
    change, see Janet Ward Schofield, Black and White in School: Trust,
    Tension, or Tolerance? (New York: Praeger, 1982). As well, there are
    earlier case studies of institutional change leading to attitudinal change.
    For example, see Leo Bogart, ed., Social Research and the Desegregation
    of the U.S. Army (Chicago: Markham, 1969), pp. 1--41, for an analysis of
    the way authoritative action and structural change played a critical role in
    changing attitudes to desegregate the U.S. Army beginning in 1948.
38. Goodwin, Remembering America, p. 316.
39. In the terms of political economy, one could analyze the adaptive capacity
    and resilience of a community in terms of the concept "social capital,"
    which can be understood as "the features of social organization, such as
    trust, norms, and networks, that can improve the efficiency of society by
    facilitating coordinated actions . . ." See Putnam, Making Democracy
    Work, p. 167. The more social capital, the stronger the holding environ-
    ment of the community and thus the higher the limit of tolerance of stress
    the community can withstand without resorting to work avoidance.
40. Of course, not all action reduces the general level of stress. Urgent or
    extreme action in a situation that seems not to call for it will generate
    alarm. I describe one such example in Chapter 7: President Carter's mass
    firing of his cabinet in July 1979.
41. Goodwin, Remembering America, pp. 319-320.
42. As Senate Minority Leader, Johnson had used a similar strategy in the
    Senate's efforts to repudiate Joseph McCarthy. As he told Maury Maverick,
316   I Notes to Pages 143-147

    "You have got to realize that ... the hysteria around the country and in
    the Government . . . can be dispelled only by letting it run its course so
    that people can see for themselves what is really behind all the noise."
    Johnson waited faithfully for McCarthy to alienate his conservative Senate
    colleagues and then the American people, both of which McCarthy even-
    tually did. When McCarthy's own Republican colleagues were set to cen-
    sure him, Johnson called a meeting of the Democratic Policy Committee
    and persuaded its members to refrain from taking a stand for fear "that
    it would play into McCarthy's hands and put him back in the good graces
    of the Republican Party." Instead, the committee recommended that each
    senator vote his own conscience. He then arranged for a bipartisan com-
    mittee to investigate McCarthy, and selected meticulously a group of con-
    servative Democrats and Republicans with indisputable credentials and
    reputations to condemn McCarthy, which it did. The Senate concurred in
    a vote of 67-to-22.
       Issues have their own rate of ripening. The rate can be sped up, as the
    Selma events demonstrate, but ultimately the rate is determined by the
    speed at which people learn. I believe Johnson understood both the pos-
    sibility of ripening issues, as he demonstrated by calling Roy Wilkins in
    January 1964, as well as the limits to which one could accelerate the
    process of ripening. Johnson spoke to these limits when he told Elizabeth
    Rowe after McCarthy had been censured, "You see, you always wanted
    me to hurry, to speed it up, but I kept telling you, you can't speed it up.
    You have got to know when the time has come." Dallek, Lone Star Rising,
    pp. 451-459.
43. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 239.
44. Ibid., p. 239. Wallace did run for President in 1968 on this platform.
45. See Goodwin, Remembering America, p. 323.
46. Charles E. Fager, Selma: The March that Changed the South (Boston:
    Beacon Press, 1985), pp. 148-149.
47. For a detailed account of the bargaining between King, Abernathy, and
    LeRoy Collins, Johnson's emissary, which led to turning the march around
    after reaching the spot where Sunday's beatings had taken place, see
    Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down, pp. 337-341.
48. From "Text of Johnson Address to Joint Session of Congress," The Wash-
    ington Post, March 16, 1965, p. A14.
49. Thomas Schelling describes this as a "commitment strategy." By commit-
    ting himself publicly, Johnson communicated his resolve to Congress.
    Schelling used the term somewhat differently given the context in which
    he developed it: nuclear arms control, where commitment to retaliate made
    deterrent threat credible, and thereby reduced the probability of ever
    having to act on the commitment. Thomas C. Schelling, The Strategy of
    Conflict (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960), p. 14.
                                           Notes to Pages 148-151        I 317

50. Dallek, Lone Star Rising, pp. 496, 517-528.
51. Caro, Means of Ascent, p. xvii.
52. "President Seizes Rights Movement Leadership," The Washington Post,
    March 17, 1965, p. A14.
53. Johnson, The Vantage Point, p. 157.
54. johnson's great speech to Congress was written by Richard Goodwin, one
    of Johnson's speechwriters. Johnson deliberately picked Goodwin for the
    job, and not another of his writers, because he felt Goodwin knew best
    how to put his values and sentiments into words. According to Goodwin,
    the speech would have been altogether different had it been written for
    another man. See Goodwin, Remembering America, p. 328.
55. The legislation was more powerful than any previously imagined to ad-
    dress the issue. By a double trigger mechanism, federal registrars would
    replace local officials in those states where discrimination was widely used,
    and the Attorney Gener~l would have virtual veto power over any state
    legislation on voter qualifications. See Henderson et aI., "Voting Rights
    Act of 1965 (B): LBJ and the Department of Justice."
56. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, pp. 233-235.


                           7. Falling Off the Edge
 1. See Ernest R. May, "Lessons" of the Past: The Use and Misuse of History
    in American Foreign Policy (New York: Oxford University Press, 1973),
    chap. 4; and Yuen Foong Khong, Analogies at War: Korea, Munich, Dien
    Bien Phu, and the Vietnam Decisions of 1965 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press, 1992).
 2. Larry Berman, Planning a Tragedy: The Americanization of the War in
    Vietnam (New York: Norton, 1982), p. 131.
 3. See George C. Herring, America's Longest War: The United States and
    Vietnam 1950-1975 (New York: Wiley, 1979); and Larry Berman, Plan-
    ning a Tragedy.
 4. According to former American ambassador to Vietnam, General Maxwell
    Taylor, "In 1965 we knew very little about the Hanoi leaders other than
    Ho Chi Minh and General Giap and virtually nothing about their individ-
    ual or collective intentions. We were inclined to assume, however, that they
    would behave about like the North Koreans and the Red Chinese a decade
    before; that is, they would seek an accommodation with us when the cost
    of pursuing a losing course became excessive. Instead, the North Vietnam-
    ese proved to be incredibly tough in accepting losses which, by Western
    calculation, greatly exceeded the value of the stake involved." Cited in
    Berman, Planning a Tragedy, p. 143.
 5. Contrary to the image that Johnson's advisers fell into a pattern of group-
    think (Irving Janis, Groupthink, second edition [Houghton Mifflin: Boston,
318   I Notes to Pages 151-154

    1982], chap. 5), recently published documents show that Johnson received
    a great many competing points of view, not only from Undersecretary of
    State George Ball but also from Clark Clifford, Vice-President Humphrey,
    Jack Valenti, Senator Mansfield, CIA Director William Raborn, and Am-
    bassador Llewelyn Thompson. In Burke and Greenstein's view, a major
    problem was not the absence of diverse opinions but the lack of a process
    for following through analytically on these differences. They contrast
    johnson's policymaking process with Eisenhower's. Eisenhower, as a mili-
    tary commander, had a better understanding of how easily one can be
    misled in foreign policy and thus made systematic reality testing a priority
    in his decisionmaking process. As a result, he established as President a
    quite formal procedure to appraise and test foreign policy questions, and
    acted much less the part of the lone warrior. See John P. Burke and Fred
    I. Greenstein, How Presidents Test Reality: Decisions on Vietnam, 1954
    and 1965 (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1989).
 6. See Richard E. Neustadt, Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents:
    The Politics of Leadership from Roosevelt to Reagan, third edition (New
    York: Free Press, 1990), pp. 209-212.
 7. Herring, America's Longest War, p. 116.
 8. Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., The Imperial Presidency (Boston: Houghton
    Mifflin, 1989), p. 179.
 9. Richard N. Goodwin, Remembering America (Boston: Little, Brown,
    1988), p. 362.
10. Herring, America's Longest War, p. 120.
11. Gordon Silverstein, "Constitutional Constraints: How Constitutional In-
    terpretation Shapes the Making of American Foreign Policy" (Ph.D. diss.,
    Harvard University, 1991), pp. 200-201.
12. Doris Kearns, Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream (New York: New
    American Library, 1976), p. 207. Regarding the Senate's perception of this
    event, see u.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, "Hearing on U.S.
    Commitments to Foreign Powers," 90th Congress, 1967, p. 139.
13. Goodwin, Remembering America, p. 359.
14. Berman, Planning a Tragedy, p. 33.
15. Goodwin, Remembering America, pp. 357, 361.
16. Burke and Greenstein, How Presidents Test Reality, pp. 118-149; quota-
    tion on p. 126.
17. From a State Department report on "Congressional Attitudes on SVN
    [South Vietnam]," cited in Burke and Greenstein, How Presidents Test
    Reality, pp. 148-149. An Associated Press poll of 83 senators on January
    6, 1965, found that only eight favored the commitment of American forces
    in Vietnam and only three favored immediate withdrawal. Ten senators
    wanted immediate negotiations, and 31 favored a negotiated settlement
                                           Notes to Pages 154-156       I 319

    after strengthening the u.s. and South Vietnamese bargaining position.
    Ibid., p. 148.
18. Ibid., pp. 130, 192-194.
19. Cited in Berman, Planning a Tragedy, p. 55.
20. Ibid., p. 57; and "Chronology of Presidential Decisions," in "Vietnam
    Documents" (Cambridge: John F. Kennedy School of Government Case
    Program, Harvard University), Case #C14-80-271D.
21. Robert McNamara, "Memorandum for the President: Recommendations
    of Additional Deployments to Vietnam," July 20, 1965, and "Summary
    Notes of 553rd NSC Meeting," July 27, 1965, in "Vietnam Documents."
    Also Berman, Planning a Tragedy, pp. 112-123.
22. Cited in Burke and Greenstein, How Presidents Test Reality, p. 230.
23. Herring, America's Longest War, p. 141.
24. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 294.
25. Excerpts from McGeorge Bundy, "Memorandum for the President: The
    Situation in Vietnam," Saigon, February 7, 1965, in "Vietnam Docu-
    ments," italics in the original. Bundy's belief that the American people had
    the will for such a war was merely conjecture, although not stated as such.
    In fact, the public had never been challenged to think about the hard
    questions. If anything, Johnson's landslide victory against hawkish Senator
    Goldwater suggested that the people did not have the will for war. The
    Gallup Poll of June 9, 1965, reported that 20 percent of the public wanted
    to "continue our present course of action," 21 percent wanted to "increase
    military action," 26 percent wanted to "stop military action," and 28
    percent expressed no opinion. Hardly a consensus. The issue had not
    formed clearly in people's minds. Poll reported in Burke and Greenstein,
    How Presidents Test Reality, p. 253.
26. In regard to the reasons for deception, see Herring, America's Longest War,
    pp. 142-143; and Neustadt, Presidential Power, p. 211.
27. See Lyndon B. Johnson, The Vantage Point: Perspectives of the Presidency
    1963-1969 (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971), pp. 150-151.
    Senator Mansfield had been a long-time supporter of American involve-
    ment in South Vietnam. Indeed, he was a founding member of the Friends
    of Vietnam in the 1950s. But a major reversal in his views followed a
    fact-gathering trip at President Kennedy's request in November 1962. In
    his report to Kennedy, he gave a poor prognosis on the counterinsurgency
    program and the Diem regime's survivability. After eight years of major
    U.S. commitment, "substantially the same difficulties remain if, indeed,
    they have not been compounded." Douglas J. MacDonald, Adventures in
    Chaos: American Intervention for Reform in the Third World (Cambridge:
    Harvard University Press, 1992), p. 223. See also Schlesinger, The Imperial
    Presidency, p. 327.
320   I Notes to Pages 157-158

28. See Silverstein, "Constitutional Constraints."
29. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, pp. 289-290; also see Schlesinger, The Imperial
    Presidency, p. 46.
30. Cited in Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 89. Up until World War
    II, although presidents claimed greater prerogative, they typically acknow-
    ledged the need for Congressional authority in many foreign policy prob-
    lems, even if after the fact. For example, Jefferson engaged in battle with
    Barbary Coast pirates and went to Congress for authorization after the
    fact. Polk got into a war with Mexico and presented Congress with a fait
    accompli. Lincoln asked for Congressional authorization for the Civil War
    after the war had started. Although each stretched the limits of presidential
    authority, each also acknowledged that he had done so. Also see Silver-
    stein, "Constitutional Constraints," chap. 2.
31. Silverstein, "The Emergence of an Executive Prerogative Interpretation of
    the Constitution," in "Constitutional Constraints," chap. 3.
32. Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 141. Not all members of Congress
    thought it so. After the Korean War began to go badly, Congressman
    Coudert submitted a resolution to "prevent the commitment of armed
    forces abroad in advance of aggression solely by executive decision."
    Senator Taft argued, "I think that the value of such aid and comfort [to
    the enemy] is grossly exaggerated. The only thing that can give real aid
    and comfort to the enemy is the adoption of a policy which plays into
    their hands." Ibid., p. 137.
33. Ibid., p. 128.
34. For the role of covert operations in American foreign policy, see Gregory
    F. Treverton, Covert Action: The Limits of Intervention in the Post- War
    World (New York: Basic, 1987). Schlesinger suggests that by Eisenhower's
    day, withholding information from Congress had become routine. The
    Courts, as well, reinforced this trend. Two Supreme Court rulings in the
    1930s, Curtiss- Wright and Belmont, spoke to the President's control over
    foreign affairs. In Curtiss- Wright, Justice Sutherland wrote that Congress
    "must often accord to the President a degree of discretion and freedom
    from statutory restriction which would not be admissible were domestic
    affairs alone involved." For "in this vast external realm, with its important,
    complicated, delicate and manifold problems, the President alone has the
    power to speak and listen as a representative of the nation." Cited in
    Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 102.
35. For example, Senator Barry Goldwater claimed in 1971: "We have only
    been in five declared wars out of over 150 that we have fought." Cited in
    Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 53. For a more extensive discus-
    sion of these so-called wars, see The Imperial Presidency, chap. 3.
36. Ibid., p. 99.
                                            Notes to Pages 158-165 I         321

37. Silverstein, "Constitutional Constraints," p. 182.
38. Cited in Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 160.
39. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 264.
40. Lyndon B. Johnson Oral History, August 12, 1969, Johnson Library; cited
    in Burke and Greenstein, How Presidents Test Reality, p. 191.
41. Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 14.
42. James Madison, Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787, vol. 2 (Buf-
    falo: Prometheus, 1987), pp. 457-458. Jefferson cited by Schlesinger, The
    Imperial Presidency, p. 14.
43. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 297.
44. Senator Frank Church in the Congressional Record, Senate, June 20, 1969,
    p. 16748; cited by Silverstein, "Constitutional Constraints," p. 218.
45. Benjamin Cohen cited by Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 109.
46. Ibid., p. 110.
47. During his 1940 presidential campaign Roosevelt promised, "I have said
    this before, but I shall say it again and again and again: Your boys are not
    going to be sent into any foreign wars." Cited in Califano, The Triumph
    and Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson, p. 172.
48. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 327.
49. By 1966 Johnson was quite deliberately letting this happen. In an effort
    to protect his Secretary of Defense, he instructed his staff, "They'll destroy
    that man. This isn't his war. If it belongs to anybody, it's my war. Let's
    stop him from talking about it so much, and I'll defend it. Make it the
    President's War, not McNamara's War." Califano, The Triumph and Trag-
    edy of Lyndon Johnson, p. 47.
50. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, pp. 277, 296.
51. Neustadt, Presidential Power, p. 200.
52. For example, one of the key lessons Ronald Reagan and his staff appar-
    ently drew from Jimmy Carter's presidency was the need to focus on one
    major issue at a time rather than overload the carrying capacity of Con-
    gress. Personal communication, Stuart Eizenstat, Domestic Policy Adviser
    in the Carter Administration, May 1983.
53. Letter to Chester Bowles, cited in Robert Dallek, Lone Star Rising: Lyndon
    Johnson and His Times: 1908-1960 (New York: Oxford University Press,
    1991), p. 528.
54. Califano, The Triumph and Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson, p. 124. In my
    terms, Johnson knew how to pick ripe issues, and how to ripen green ones.
    For an account of his skill in ripening an issue, see "Lyndon Johnson and
    the War on Poverty," in Barbara Kellerman, The Political Presidency (New
    York: Oxford University Press, 1984), chap. 7.
55. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, pp. 268-269.
322   /   Notes to Pages 166-171

56. Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, Thinking in Time: The Uses of
    History for Decision-Makers (New York: Free Press, 1986), p. 88.
57. This is an application of Neustadt and May's analytic term "placement,"
    with somewhat different connotations. By placement, they meant placing
    the person or organization that one is analyzing in the context of the major
    public events taking place that serve as background in the formation of
    the individual or organizational character. Neustadt and May, Thinking In
    Time, pp. 238-240.
58. Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 206.
59. According to Burke and Greenstein, up until the Pleiku attack in February
    1965, Johnson had quite a bit of room to broker work on the issue, both
    in Congress and with the public. Pleiku added greatly to the momentum
    toward involvement. Burke and Greenstein, How Presidents Test Reality,
    pp. 270-271.
60. Johnson lost his first race for the Senate by a thousand votes, and won in
    1948 by 87. See Robert A. Caro, The Years of Lyndon Johnson: Means
    of Ascent (New York: Vintage Books, 1990), which describes these two
    campaigns in vivid detail; Robert Dallek, Lone Star Rising, pp. 223, 346;
    and Kearns, Lyndon Johnson, p. 215.
61. Burke and Greenstein, How Presidents Test Reality, pp. 205-206.
62. Caro, Means of Ascent, p. 15.
63. Idaho Senator Frank Church reported in a Congressional Research Service
    interview in the summer of 1965 his impressions after taking a trip with
    Johnson to San Francisco in June for the twentieth anniversary celebration
    of the United Nations. Johnson had told him of his sleepless nights waiting
    to hear how many American planes would be lost after a raid. Johnson
    "had personalized the war by this time and that disturbed me greatly,
    because I thought it meant that he was losing his capacity to render an
    objective judgement by losing his detachment." Cited in Burke and Green-
    stein, How Presidents Test Reality, p. 240.
64. "The extreme measures he took to defend his Vietnam policy against
    enemies real and imagined led directly to the Watergate scandals which
    would eventually force his resignation." Herring, America's Longest War,
    p. 251; also see Jonathan Schell, "The Nixon Years: Parts I-VI," The New
    Yorker: June 2, 1975, pp. 42-83; June 9, 1975, pp. 70-111; June 16,
    1975, pp. 55-96; June 23, 1975, pp. 60-91; June 30, 1975, pp. 39-77;
    and July 7, 1975, pp. 38-62.
65. Schell, "The Nixon Years," Part I, p. 54.
66. Herring, America's Longest Wat; pp. 221-225.
67. Quoted in Schell, "The Nixon Years," Part I, p. 46.
68. Speech on October 30, 1969, quoted in Schell, "The Nixon Years," Part
    I, p. 75.
69. William Safire, Before the Fall: An Inside View of the Pre- Watergate White
                                           Notes to Pages 171-177 I 323

    House (New York: Doubleday, 1975), pp. 178-179; and Schell, "The
    Nixon Years," Part I, p. 77.
70. Nixon began wire-tapping senior administration officials and prominent
    newsmen in May 1969 when news of the Cambodian bombings leaked to
    the press. Schell, "The Nixon Years," Part I, p. 57.
71. Safire, Before the Fall, p. 190.
72. Ibid., p. 308.
73. Ibid., p. 366.
74. Cited in Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 217.
75. Charles W. Colson, Born Again (Old Tappan, NJ: Chosen Books, 1976),
    p.41.
76. Neustadt, Presidential Power, p. 188.
77. Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 267.
78. For various renditions of the Watergate story, see Elizabeth Drew, Wash-
    ington Journal: The Events of 1973-1974 (New York: Random House,
    1974); Sam Ervin, The Whole Truth: The Watergate Conspiracy (New
    York: Random House, 1980); and John Wesley Dean, Blind Ambition: The
    White House Years (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1976).
79. Neustadt, Presidential Power, p. 189.
80. Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, p. 189.
81. See Henry Kissinger's memoirs: White House Years (Boston: Little, Brown,
    1979), and Years of Upheaval (Boston: Little, Brown, 1982).
82. See Bruce Mazlish, In Search of Nixon (New York: Basic Books, 1972).
83. According to Schlesinger, more than any other President, Nixon went way
    beyond his Constitutional authority in domestic affairs, from his use of
    the pocket veto and the impoundment of funds-a substitute for the item
    veto-to unilaterally abolishing statutory programs. Schlesinger, The Im-
    perial Presidency, pp. 235-277.
84. Herring, America's Longest War, p. 232.
85. See Herring, America's Longest War, pp. 252-254, for an account of how
    shallow and fragile were the Paris Peace Accords.
86. The effects of Watergate in terms of work neglected were manifold. Not
    only did the presidency as an institution take the heat from Congress for
    Congress's failure to take decisive action during the Vietnam War, but
    substantive issues as well suffered, including detente and arms control with
    the Soviets and economic policy following the inflationary 1973 oil shocks.
    Neustadt, Presidential Power, p. 213.
87. For a study of the aftermath of war from the perspective of the individual
    soldier in World War II, see J. Glenn Gray, The Warriors; Reflections on
    Men in Battle, second edition (New York: Harper Torchbook, 1970); for
    the sequelae of u.s. soldiers in Vietnam, see Tim O'Brien, The Things They
    Carried: A Work of Fiction (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990); Frederick
    Downs, Aftermath: A Soldier's Return from Vietnam (New York: Norton,
324   /   Notes to Pages 177-178

    1984); and Laura Palmer, "The Nurses of Vietnam, Still Wounded," The
    New York Times Magazine, November 7, 1993, pp. 36-73.
88. Joseph C. Harsh, "Do You Recall Vietnam-And What About Domi-
    noes?" Louisville Courier-Journal, October 2, 1975; cited in Herring,
    America's Longest War, p. 265.
89. Herring, America's Longest War, p. 265.
90. The pressures toward an autocratic presidency in foreign affairs surely did
    not arise from domestic expectations alone. The world community added
    greatly to these expectations. Political scientists and economists have de-
    scribed those expectations in hegemonic stability theory, which "claims
    that the presence of a single, strongly dominant actor in international
    politics leads to collectively desirable outcomes for all states in the inter-
    national system. Conversely, the absence of a hegemon is associated with
    disorder in the world system and undesirable outcomes for individual
    states." Duncan Snidal, "The Limits of Hegemonic Stability Theory," In-
    ternational Organization, vol. 39, autumn 1985, p. 579, italics in the
    original. Charles Kindleberger describes the expected functions of the
    hegemon in the context of the Great Depression: "In these circumstances,
    the international economic and monetary system needs leadership, a coun-
    try that is prepared, consciously or unconsciously, under some system of
    rules that it has internalized, to set standards of conduct for other countries
    and to seek to get others to follow them, to take on an undue share of
    the burdens of the system, and in particular, to take on its support in
    adversity by accepting its redundant commodities, maintaining a flow of
    investment capital, and discounting its paper." Charles P. Kindleberger, The
    World in Depression, 1929-39 (Berkeley: University of California Press,
    1986), p. 11. Whether or not any dominant actor, be it Britain in the
    century before 1913, or the U.S. after World War II, has in fact fulfilled
    the expected functions is a matter of debate. See Joseph S. Nye Jr., Bound
    to Lead: The Changing Nature of American Power (New York: Basic,
    1990), pp. 50-52. Less debatable, however, is the observation that
    hegemons have at least been expected to perform a special coordinating
    role in the international system, a set of expectations that would be felt
    most acutely in the case of the United States by the President. To some
    degree, these expectations run parallel to those described in this study: the
    unrealistic longing for a technical solution to a set of adaptive challenges
    serves to allow the primary stakeholders to avoid responsibility. The locus
    of problem-solving shifts to the dominant authority. See Barry Eichengreen,
    Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939
    (New York: Oxford, 1992), pp. 390-399, for an analysis of how the u.S.
    refusal to support the gold standard has often been considered a key
    abdication of hegemonic responsibility, when, as he argues, the interwar
                                           Notes to Pages 178-183       I 325

    years consisted of a complex array of problems not amenable to technical
    fixes-like the gold standard-from above.
91. See Schlesinger, The Imperial Presidency, chap. 9.
92. See Neustadt and May, Thinking in Time, pp. 65-74.
93. "Transcript of President's Address to Country on Energy Problems," The
    New York Times, July 16, 1979, p. AlD.
94. According to a New York Times/CBS News poll, Carter's approval rating
    went up from 26 percent to 37 percent the day after the speech. "Speech
    Lifts Carter Rating to 370/0; Public Agrees on Confidence Crisis," The New
    York Times, July 18, 1979, p. Al. But one month later, the Gallup Poll
    showed a decline from the previous January from 38 percent to 27 percent
    in the percentage of voters believing that Carter had "strong leadership
    qualities," from 43 percent to 33 percent believing that he was "decisive
    and sure of himself," and from 29 percent to 19 percent believing that he
    had a "well-defined program for moving the country ahead." "Many in
    Poll Place Trust in Carter Despite Doubt over Performance," The New
    York Times, August 12, 1979, p. 25.
95. For two key exceptions, see Neustadt, Presidential Power; and Arthur M.
    Schlesinger Jr.'s three-part series on Franklin Roosevelt: The Crisis of the
    Old Order (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1956); The Coming of the New
    Deal (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1958); and The Politics of Upheaval
    (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1960).
96. Silverstein, "Constitutional Constraints," p. 218.


                  8. Creative Deviance on the Frontline
 1. The NIMBY syndrome has been well studied in an array of public policy
    areas, from finding hazardous waste disposal sites to siting low income
    housing projects, airports, and prisons. See Lawrence Bacow, Michael
    O'Hare, and Debra Sanderson, Facility Siting and Public Opposition (New
    York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983); and The Advisory Commission on
    Regulatory Barriers to Affordable Housing, Not In My Backyard: Remov-
    ing Barriers to Affordable Housing, Report to President Bush and Secretary
    Kemp (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Devel-
    opment, 1991).
 2. Robert C. Tucker distinguishes "constituted" (legitimate) from "noncon-
    stituted" (informal) leaders, which I describe in this volume as leadership
    with and without authority. See his Politics as Leadership (Columbia:
    University of Missouri Press, 1981), pp. 77-113. Tucker's distinction
    points primarily to the differences between leading with and without for-
    mal authority, hence the term "constituted." This points in the right direc-
    tion. I believe we also need to acknowledge the power of informal
326   /   Notes to Page 1 86


    authority alone and the exercise of leadership with it, as well as leadership
    without either formal or informal authority.
 3. Washington, Jefferson, Madison, and Monroe were but a few of the
    Southern founders of the nation, and all except Washington were towering
    figures throughout Lincoln's early life. The dates alone are revealing when
    we try to imagine how fresh and alive were the ideas represented by Union
    during Lincoln's growth and professional development. Abraham Lincoln
    was born in 1809. Thomas Jefferson was President from 1801-1809 and
    lived until 1826, when Lincoln was seventeen years old. James Madison
    was President from 1809-1817 and lived until 1836, when Lincoln was
    twenty-seven. James Monroe was President from 1817-1825 and lived
    until 1831, when Lincoln" was twenty-two.
 4. By and large, I have stayed away from the term leader in this study,
    preferring to use the active phrase "exercising leadership," except when
    using the word colloquially within the context of someone else's usage in
    these case studies. I tend to avoid the term leader because it generally
    connotes an authority figure (the leader of the band) or a specific set of
    personal traits (He's a real leader). Instead, I wish to keep our primary
    focus on the activity of leading and not on the role of authority or the
    intrinsic qualities of any person. Occasionally, however, I will use leader
    as a simple shorthand to refer to a person who is exercising leadership or
    who intends to. I use the term leader primarily in discussing leadership
    without authority because in this context there is no noun with which to
    refer to an individual actor in the way I use the phrase authority figure.
      The reader may have noticed that I have also cast aside even more fully
    the word follower. It seems to me that follower hopelessly entangles us in
    an inappropriate social contract and logic. Although our common use of
    language makes us think that there is an inherent truth to the couplet
    leader-follower, just as we do with pairs like up-down and good-bad, I
    think there is no truth here, merely custom. Indeed, the word follower,
    which connotes somewhat mindless, lemming-like behavior, fails to suggest
    how it feels and what it means to be mobilized to do adaptive work. As
    a member of a community, the feelings are less a "going along with" than
    what Bernard Bass describes as stimulation in Leadership and Performance
    beyond Expectations (New York: Free Press, 1985). For example, when
    Martin Luther King Jr. stimulated white conservative citizens to imagine a
    different balance of values and power, he led them, and they changed in
    the process; but they did not follow. They were stimulated to think and
    feel new thoughts, but they were not in the least his followers. King's black
    constituents as well were stimulated and empowered to rethink their val-
    ues, self-images, and habits. However, to call them followers captures not
    at all their role in shaping the process of change in America or the way
    they experienced that role.
                                          Notes to Pages 187-193 I 327

 5. Even revolutionaries like Mao Zedong build their movements and philoso-
    phies upon the fundamental values and traditions of their societies. Mao
    may have rejected the Confucian virtue of manners, but he espoused
    primary Chinese values when he attacked imperialism, and he spoke to
    fundamental high Confucian standards of conduct for authority figures
    when he attacked corruption, warlords, local bullies, and evil gentry. See
    James MacGregor Burns, Leadership (New York: Harper Colophon,
    1978), pp. 228-240.
 6. See Taylor Branch, Parting the Waters: America in the King Years: 1954-
    1963 (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1988), chaps. 18-20.
 7. Ibid., pp. 837, 838, and 850.
 8. Gandhi's strategies and philosophical roots are described both in his own
    writings and in a variety of biographical efforts. See Mohandas K. Gandhi,
    An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments with Truth (Boston:
    Beacon Press, 1957); Gopinath Dhawan, The Political Philosophy of Ma-
    hatma Gandhi (Ahmedabad, India: Navajivan Publishing House, 1946);
    and Louis Fischer, The Life of Mahatma Gandhi (New York: Harper and
    Row, 1950). For a psychological interpretation of Gandhi's political be-
    havior, see Erik Erikson, Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant
    Nonviolence (New York: Norton, 1969).
 9. For an account of Gandhi's visit to the Lancashire cotton mills in 1931,
    ten years after Gandhi had started the Indian boycott of British cotton
    fabric with cloth-burning, see William L. Shirer, Gandhi: A Memoir (New
    York: Washington Square Press, 1979), pp. 182-186.
10. See Fischer, The Life of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 123-137, for Gandhi's
    understanding of India's adaptive challenge on his return to India and his
    first major speech to those with authority and power in which he pointedly
    describes the discrepancy between espoused values and concrete reality.
11. See Fischer, The Life of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 184-198.
12. There are many such examples, including Gandhi's 1932 fast from prison
    to protest the caste system and Untouchability. Upon announcement that
    an election would be held in which Untouchables would vote separately
    from the rest of the population, Gandhi vowed to fast to the death. His
    target audience was not the British but Indians. He achieved astonishing
    results. Within five days he had performed what many considered a "mir-
    acle" by provoking Hindus throughout India to open Temples to Untouch-
    ables and to begin the breakdown of an ancient taboo. See Willner, The
    Spellbinders, pp. 189-191.
13. Fischer, The Life of Mahatma Gandhi, pp. 123-133.
14. "The very purpose of a hierarchy is to prevent information from reaching
    higher layers. It operates as an information filter, and there are little
    wastebaskets all along the way." Kenneth Boulding, from a speech reported
    in Business Week, February 18, 1967, p. 202; cited in H. Edward Wrapp,
328   I Notes to Pages 193-208

    "Good Managers Don't Make Policy Decisions," in Harvard Business
    Review: On Human Relations (New York: Harper and Row, 1980), p. 75.
    For an analysis of this and other strategic problems, see Jeffrey Pfeffer,
    "Political Strategy and Tactics," in Power in Organizations (Boston: Pit-
    man, 1981), chap. 5; also see James Bruce, The Intuitive Pragmatist: Con-
    versations with Chief Executive Officers (Greensboro, NC: Center for
    Creative Leadership, 1986).
15. Richard E. Neustadt, Presidential Power and the Modern Presidents: The
    Politics of Leadership from Roosevelt to Reagan, third edition (New York:
    Free Press, 1990), p. 129.
16. Fischer, The Life of Mahatma Gandhi, p. 131.
17. The following account of Sanger's life is taken from Ellen Chesler, Woman
    of Valor: Margaret Sanger and the Birth Control Movement in America
    (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992).
18. Ibid., p. 63.
19. Ibid., p. 127.
20. Ibid., pp. 131-132.
21. Ibid., p. 374.
22. "Because [Sanger] viewed elected officials as conformists who 'expressed
    public sentiment,' she focused on changing public opinion first and the law
    later. When she did lobby for changing the law, she expected not to win,
    but to gain more publicity and generate more public debate." Ibid.,
    pp. 144-145.
23. The names of the protagonists in these two Vietnam cases have been
    changed to protect privacy.
24. During World War II, Samuel Stouffer studied extensively the competing
    sources of formal and informal authority (expectations) on military
    officers, including those with noncommissioned and midlevel rank, and the
    stress generated by conflicting role expectations. See "Attitudes toward
    Leadership and Social Control," in Samuel A. Stouffer, Edward A. Such-
    man, Leland C. DeVinney, Shirley A. Star, and Robin M. Williams Jr., The
    American Soldier: Adjustment during Army Life (Princeton, Princeton
    University Press, 1949), vol. 1, chap. 8, esp. pp. 401-410.


                      9. Modulating the Provocation
 1. Although the case of Selma used later in this chapter illustrates the senior
    formal authority figures as barometers of systemic stress, this idea can also
    be applied to senior informal authority figures within the bounds of their
    informal constituency. Their informal constituents will often expect them
    to provide direction, protection, and order in much the same way as a
    formal constituency.
                                          Notes to Pages 208-220      /   329

 2. Parts of the following account are based on J. L. Chestnut Jr. and Julia
    Cass, Black in Selma: The Uncommon Life of J. L. Chestnut, Jr. (New
    York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1990). In addition, parts are taken
    verbatim from excerpts of the teaching case prepared by James Henderson,
    Philip B. Heymann, Richard E. Neustadt, William Mates, and Mark H.
    Moore, "The Voting Rights Act of 1965 (A): The Selma Campaign"
    (Cambridge: John F. Kennedy School of Government Case Program, Har-
    vard University, 1977), Case #C14-75-113. Quotations are from this
    teaching case, except where otherwise noted.
 3. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, pp. 135-136.
 4. Ibid., pp. 153-154.
 5. Ibid., pp. 160.
 6. Lafayette quoted in ibid., p. 166.
 7. According to Chestnut, Judge Hare was the decisionmaker in the white
    community, and the initiative to suppress the demonstrations came from
    him and not primarily from Sheriff Clark. "Judge in a Nutshell," in
    Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, chap. 10.
 8. Ibid., p. 188. (The excerpts from "The Voting Rights Act of 1965 [A]: The
    Selma Campaign" end here.)
 9. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, p. 212.
10. Martin Luther King Jr., Why We Can't Wait (New York: Mentor, 1963),
    pp. 81-82.
11. Ralph David Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down (New York:
    Harper and Row, 1989), pp. 297, 300, 393.
12. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, pp. 260, 194.
13. Charles E. Fager, Selma: The March that Changed the South (Boston:
    Beacon Press, 1985), pp. 3-11.
14. Ibid., p. 7.
15. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, p. 194.
16. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, p. 191.
17. "Chronology of Events at Selma, Ala.," The Washington Post, March 22,
    1965, p. A9; and Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down,
    p.325.
18. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, p. 204.
19. According to Abernathy, Governor Wallace had engineered the breaking
    up of the march so that it would occur just inside the city line, and thus
    could be attributed to Clark and not to him. On Monday Wallace then
    met with Clark and "chewed him out angrily for allowing Sunday's vio-
    lence." Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down, p. 326; also see
    Fager, Selma, p. 101.
20. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, p. 198.
21. For an analysis of the parallel problem of hasty economic reform, see
330   I Notes to Pages 222-236

    Shang-Jin Wei, "Gradualism Versus Big Bang: Speed and Sustainability of
    Reforms," Working Paper Series #R93-2 (Cambridge: John F. Kennedy
    School of Government, Harvard University, March 1993).
22. Fager, Selma, p. 57.
23. Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down, pp. 322-323; Hender-
    son et aI., "The Voting Rights Act of 1965 (A): The Selma Campaign,"
    p.5.
24. "Dr. King Sees Johnson, Asks U.S. Registrars," The Washington Post,
    March 6, 1965, p. A2.
25. "Demands Rise across U.S. for Selma Action," The Washington Post,
    March 13, 1965, p. A8.
26. Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down, p. 325.
27. As time would prove, a restraining order along with both planning and
    national guard protection could not guarantee safety when the three-day
    march to Montgomery began two weeks later, on March 21. Mrs. Viola
    Liuzzo, a white Detroit housewife, was shot and killed in her car while
    shuttling demonstrators back to Selma at the end of the march. "Mother
    of 5 Slain after March," The Washington Post, March 26, 1965, p. AI.
    See also Henderson et aI., "The Voting Rights Act of 1965 (A): The Selma
    Campaign," p. 14; Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down,
    pp. 335-342.
28. Fager, Selma, p. 101.
29. For accounts of some of King's personal and strategic mistakes, see Aber-
    nathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down; and Branch, Parting the
    Waters.
30. William L. Shirer, Gandhi: A Memoir (New York: Washington Square
    Press, 1979), p. 167.
31. Chesler, Woman of Valor, pp. 219-220.
32. I mentioned one such example in Chapter 7, when Undersecretary of State
    George Ball rewrote numerous critical memos on Vietnam policy to Presi-
    dent Johnson, less alarming and more palatable, to no avail.
33. Abernathy, And the Walls Came Tumbling Down, p. 342.
34. See Taylor Branch, Parting the Waters, p. 824.
35. King, Why We Can't Wait, p. 79.
36. Chestnut and Cass, Black in Selma, p. 235.


                             10. Assassination
 1. For an economic model of this problem, see Raquel Fernandez and Dani
    Rodrik, "Resistance to Reform: Status Quo Bias in the Presence of Indi-
    vidual-Specific Uncertainty," American Economic Review, vol. 81, Decem-
    ber 1991, pp. 1146-1155.
                                          Notes to Pages 238-239 / 331

2. In his analysis of political leadership after World War II, jasper Shannon
   suggests that people have been inclined throughout history to endow their
   political authorities with magical gifts, in societies from traditional to
   modern. Even in democratic societies, "The principle trend is . . . the
   perhaps naive belief, deliberately propagandized by politicians themselves
   to get votes, that leaders are accountable for the evils or the goods of
   society." Jasper B. Shannon, "The Study of Political Leadership," in Jasper
   B. Shannon, ed., The Study of Comparative Government (New York:
   Greenwood, 1949), p. 322. Aaron Wildavsky attributes this dynamic to
   the stability of political cultures that routinely interpret their problems in
   a characteristic way: "for or against existing authority." See Aaron
   Wildavsky, "A Cultural Theory of Leadership," in Bryan D. Jones, ed.,
   Leadership and Politics: New Perspectives in Political Science (Lawrence,
   KS: University Press of Kansas, 1989), pp. 98-100.
3. Quoted in Stanley Karnow, "Cory Aquino's Downhill Slide," The New
   York Times Magazine, August 19, 1990, p. 25.
4. Edwin O. James, "Expiation and Atonement," in Sacrifice and Sacrament
   (New York: Barnes and Noble, 1962), chap. 5, p. 106.
5. Amando Doronila, chairman of the editorial board of the Manila Chron-
   icle, described the "people power" revolution as "extremely limited and
   flawed" in which "the return to political warlordism or tribal politics
   dominated by the family dynasties foreshadows the reassertion of the
   oligarchic tendencies in Philippine politics." Doronila argued that the alli-
   ance to overthrow Marcos "had no ideological motivation to change the
   social and power structure; it merely sought to change rulers without
   restructuring society." David joel Steinberg, The Philippines: A Singular
   and a Plural Place, second edition (Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press,
   1990), pp. 147-148. Conversations with Professor John Thomas at the
   Harvard Institute for International Development provided insight into the
   government transition in the Philippines. In the United States, Nixon's
   downfall apparently did not solve the fundamental problem of the shift of
   power from Congress to the President. See Gordon Silverstein, "Constitu-
   tional Constraints: How Constitutional Interpretation Shapes the Making
   of American Foreign Policy" (Ph.D. diss., Harvard University, 1991).
6. As Steinberg suggests, "There are unique moments in history when it is
   possible to reorganize the social hierarchy and to redistribute power. Wil-
   liam Howard Taft had such a chance at the turn of the century [when the
   Philippines became an American colony]. Douglas MacArthur, as supreme
   allied commander in Japan, exercised that opportunity to alter in the most
   profound ways the fabric and structure of japanese society. During the
   period when President Aquino had virtually limitless power under the
   freedom constitution, she had dramatic opportunity to address frontally
332   /   Notes to Pages 239-244

    the social contradictions and economic tensions of her nation." Steinberg,
    The Philippines, pp. 150-152.
 7. For an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of a coalition-building
    style of leadership, see Kerry Mullins and Aaron Wildavsky, "The Proce-
    dural Presidency of George Bush," Political Science Quarterly, vol. 107,
    spring 1992, pp. 31-62. They suggest that "coalitions are Bush's preferred
    method of problem resolution. He emphasizes the involvement of all par-
    ties, including those who disagree, particularly when encountering difficult
    issues. His approach to educational reform calls for 'all of the players-
    administrators, school boards, local business leaders, parents, teachers'
    unions-around the table working together.' His policies on the environ-
    ment, drug use, and the transportation system, all problems defying easy
    resolution, also call for widespread involvement on all levels. Indeed, they
    were not 'his' policies until they emerged out of this consensus-raising
    process. Much of this consultation can be attributed to his desire for the
    widest possible inclusion. But it also serves as a substitute for strong
    ideological commitment and a vision for how these problems might be
    solved" (p. 42). I agree with Mullins and Wildavsky that simply pulling a
    coalition together is insufficient to make progress on hard problems. In
    my view, one must also (1) hold the parties tightly in facing the issues, and
    (2) have a substantive idea about how the parties need to be challenged.
    If this is what Mullins and Wildavsky mean by vision, then vision must
    often take the form not of answers but of the hard questions that demand
    resolution. Otherwise, coalitions often end up avoiding the pain of change
    and producing the least common denominator; decisionmaking takes the
    form of "splitting the difference," and not much adaptive work gets done.
 8. The most the framers thought they could do in addressing slavery without
    losing the Southern states was to give Congress the power to outlaw the
    importation of slaves after 1808. Even that date was a compromise. They
    had initially set the year of 1800, but the Southern representatives wanted
    the year set back. In any case, the Constitutional clause meant little. By
    the time of the federal convention, Virginia and Maryland had already
    stopped importation of slaves because the birth of American born slaves
    proved sufficient for their economic aims. See James Madison, Debates in
    the Federal Convention of 1787, vol. 2 (Buffalo: Prometheus, 1987), Ses-
    sions of August 21, 22, and 25, 1787, pp. 442-447, 467-469.
 9. See Milton Friedman, "Using the Market for Social Development," Cato
    Journal, vol. 8, winter 1989, pp. 567-579.
10. China, for example, used a gradual approach, instituting agricultural re-
    forms in 1979, followed by urban/industrial reforms five years later. This
    approach was successful, in part, because it kept the level of conflict
                                           Notes to Pages 244-249 / 333

    generated by the change within socially and politically sustainable levels.
    Although agricultural reform displeased urban workers and bureaucrats
    because it meant an increase in food prices, reform pleased the majority
    of the population, which was rural. Then, when urban/industrial reforms
    were enacted, the farmers, although upset by the rise in cost of inputs
    (tractors, fertilizers), had already benefitted from reforms. They had devel-
    oped a favorable attitude toward the entire reform package and thus
    accepted industrial reform. Had the Chinese government enacted both
    reforms simultaneously, however, angering both farmers and urban resi-
    dents, the whole package might have been "shot down by street demon-
    strations or other forms of unrest." Shang-Jin Wei, "Gradualism Versus
    Big Bang: Speed and Sustainability of Reforms," Working Paper Series
    #R93-2 (Cambridge: John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
    University, March 1993), p. 3.
11. Califano, The Triumph and Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson, p. 209.
12. See Plato, The Last Days of Socrates, trans. Tredennick (New York: Pen-
    guin, 1969), pp. 45-76.
13. For example, see Socrates' trial defense in "The Apology," in Plato, The
    Last Days of Socrates, pp. 45-76.
14. Califano, The Triumph and Tragedy of Lyndon Johnson. Johnson quote,
    p. 142; Califano quote, p. 338.
15. See Sidney Hook, The Hero in History (New York: John Day, 1943),
    chap. 1.
16. Ann Ruth Willner analyzes the indicators of the charismatic political rela-
    tionship along three dimensions: (1) idealized images of the person, (2) un-
    conditional acceptance, and (3) complete emotional commitment of the
    person and, "by extension, to his vision or to the order he has created."
    See Willner, The Spellbinders, pp. 18-29. Also see Robert C. Tucker, "The
    Theory of Charismatic Leadership," Daedalus, vol. 97, summer 1968,
    pp. 742-753. For Freud's analysis of charismatic dependency, see Sigmund
    Freud, Totem and Taboo, written in 1913, trans. Strachey (New York:
    Norton, 1989); and Sigmund Freud, Group Psychology and the Analysis
    of the Ego, written in 1921, trans. Strachey (New York: Norton, 1959).
17. There are many such examples of persistent charismatic attachment, even
    when the charismatic is not killed. Although Lenin was not murdered,
    Lenin-worship took hold after his premature death and his mausoleum
    became a key national shrine. See Tucker, "The Theory of Charismatic
    Leadership," p. 754. As Willner describes, "The image of a past and even
    of a defeated charismatic leader may serve as a standard of measure against
    which those who succeed him are viewed." Willner, The Spellbinders,
    pp. 199-200.
18. David J. Garrow, Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther King, Jr., and the
334    I Notes to Pages 250-252

      Southern Christian Leadership Conference (New York: Vintage, 1988),
      p. 603; see also pp. 577-617.


                        11. The Personal Challenge
 1. Max Weber, "Politics as A Vocation," in H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills,
    eds., From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology (New York: Oxford University
    Press, 1946), p. 127, italics in the original.
 2. Argyris also suggests that loneliness at the top is a product of a reciprocal
    isolating dynamic of aloofness between subordinates and the executive. See
    Chris Argyris, Overcoming Organizational Defenses: Facilitating Organ-
    izational Learning (Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1990), p. 73. For an account
    of how several CEOs view their "loneliness," see James Bruce, The Intui-
    tive Pragmatist: Conversations with Chief Executive Officers (Greensboro,
    NC: Center for Creative Leadership, 1986). Also see Jeffrey Lynn Speller,
    Executives in Crisis: Recognizing and Managing the Alcoholic, Drug Ad-
    dicted, or Mentally III Executive (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1989).
 3. "Stunned Japanese Offer Sympathy as Some Are Struck by Symbolism,"
    The New York Times, January 9, 1992, p. A8.
 4. These ideas derive in part from research performed by members of the
    A. K. Rice Institute and its parent organization, the Tavistock Institute for
    Human Relations, in London, England. The reader interested in pursuing
    the development of some of these personal skills in experiential workshops
    may wish to explore the Group Relations Conferences produced by the
    A. K. Rice Institute; the national office is in Jupiter, Florida. For an in-
    depth description of these workshops and their pedagogical theory, see
    A. K. Rice, Learning for Leadership: Interpersonal and Intergroup Rela-
    tions (London: Tavistock, 1965). For conceptualizations of group dynami-
    cs within the Tavistock tradition, see Jonathon Gillette and Marion
    McCollom, eds., Groups in Context: A New Perspective on Group Dy-
    namics (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1990); Kenwyn Smith and David
    Berg, Paradoxes of Group Life: Understanding Conflict, Paralysis, and
    Movement in Group Dynamics (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1987); Ed-
    ward R. Shapiro and A. Wesley Carr, Lost in Familiar Places (New Haven:
    Yale University Press, 1991); and the two edited volumes published by the
    A. K. Rice Institute: Arthur D. Colman and W. Harold Bexton, eds., Group
    Relations Reader (Sausalito, CA: GREX, 1975); and Arthur D. Colman
    and Marvin H. Geller, eds., Group Relations Reader 2 (Washington, DC:
    A. K. Rice Institute, 1985).
 5. On the skill of reflection in action, see Donald A. Schon, The Reflective
    Practitioner: How Professionals Think in Action (New York: Basic, 1983);
    and Weber's "Politics as A Vocation." The Whitman quotation is from
    "Leaves of Grass," verse 4, in Walt Whitman, Leaves of Grass, original
                                            Notes to Pages 254-260        / 335

    edition (New York: Viking Compass, 1959), ed. Malcolm Cowley, p. 28.
    Athletic examples courtesy of Professor Michael O'Hare, University of
    California, Berkeley.
 6. Neustadt describes this as the need to identify the sense of responsibility
    individuals have to the constituents to whom they answer. "The essence
    of a President's persuasive task, with congressmen and everybody else, is
    to induce them to believe that what he wants of them is what their own
    appraisal of their own responsibilities requires them to do in their interest,
    not his." Richard E. Neustadt, Presidential Power and the Modern Presi-
    dents: The Politics of Leadership from Roosevelt to Reagan, third edition
    (New York: Free Press, 1990), p. 40.
 7. The corollary, well studied in the social sciences, is that people with
    particular personalities are drawn to roles with related characteristics.
    Thus, the behavior of an individual in a particular role says as much about
    the role and the institutional expectations that shape it as it does about
    the person. See Glenn D. Paige, The Scientific Study of Political Leadership
    (New York: Free Press, 1977), pp. 109-113.
 8. The idea that people routinely embody issues, and its corollary, that people
    routinely discuss and work issues not as abstractions but using the "play-
    ers" involved as proxies, has its roots in group relations theory as well as
    political science. See Wilfred R. Bion, Experiences in Groups (New York:
    Basic Books, 1961); and Aaron Wildavsky, "A Cultural Theory of Lead-
    ership," in Bryan D. Jones, ed., Leadership and Politics: New Perspectives
    in Political Science (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1989),
    pp. 97-100. For an analysis of the mirroring dynamic and how people
    import views from the task environment, see "Contextual Influences: The
    Process of Importing and Exporting Frames of Reference," in Smith and
    Berg, Paradoxes of Group Life, chap. 8.
 9. See Shapiro and Carr, Lost in Familiar Places, pp. 111-122, 137-143.
10. This case has been altered to protect privacy.
11. See Pierre M. Turquet, "Leadership: The Individual and the Group," in
    Colman and Geller, eds., Group Relations Reader 2, pp. 71-87.
12. See Sonja M. Hunt, "The Role of Leadership in the Construction of
    Reality," in Barbara Kellerman, ed., Leadership: Multidisciplinary Perspec-
    tives (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984), pp. 157-178; and Bobby
    J. Calder, "An Attribution Theory of Leadership," in Barry M. Staw and
    Gerald R. Salancik, eds., New Directions in Organizational Behavior (Chi-
    cago: St. Clair, 1977), chap. 5. For an overview of attribution theory, see
    Michael Ross and Garth Fletcher, "Attribution and Social Perception," in
    Gordon Lindzey and Elliot Aronson, eds., The Handbook of Social Psy-
    chology, third edition (New York: Random House, 1985), pp. 73-122. For
    a prescriptive view on testing and evaluating attributions, see Chris Ar-
    gyris, Strategy, Change, and Defensive Routines (Boston: Pitman, 1985).
336 /    Notes to Pages 261- 269

13. See Chapter 1 for a discussion of scapegoating in the Nazi context.
14. Tape Recording and Transcripts of the Cuban Missile Crisis Meetings,
    Presidential Recordings, October 16, 1962, John F. Kennedy Library, Meet-
    ing #1, p. 27. It is, of course, difficult to attribute a particular emotional
    state, like outrage, to someone else at a distance. What seems minimally
    clear from the tape recordings is Kennedy's very strong determination to
    take action. To my ears, his responses sound like a very disciplined form
    of outrage. Robert Kennedy describes the dominant feelings as "stunned
    surprise" and "shocked incredulity." Robert Kennedy, Thirteen Days: A
    Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis (New York: Norton, 1968), pp. 2, 5.
    In their Afterword to Thirteen Days, Richard Neustadt and Graham Al-
    lison interpret President Kennedy's feelings as startled and personal anger
    of the form: "He can't do that to me" (p. 122).
15. According to the Soviet decisionmakers, the Soviet government put missiles
    in Cuba both to achieve strategic parity and to deter a potential U.S.
    invasion of Cuba to overthrow Castro's regime. See James G. Blight and
    David A. Welch, On the Brink: Americans and Soviets Reexamine the
    Cuban Missile Crisis (New York: Hill and Wang, 1989), pp. 238-239.
16. Kennedy, Thirteen Days, pp. 64-88.
17. For a review of the sources of role-self and role-role conflict, see "Conflict
    and Legitimacy in the Leadership Role," in Bernard M. Bass, Bass and
    Stogdill's Handbook of Leadership, third edition (New York: Free Press,
    1990), chap. 15.
18. See John P. Burke and Fred I. Greenstein, How Presidents Test Reality:
    Decisions on Vietnam, 1954 and 1965 (New York: Russell Sage Founda-
    tion, 1989).
19. Geraldine A. Ferraro with Linda Bird Francke, Ferraro: My Story (New
    York: Bantam, 1985), pp. 155-180.
20. Speech at Valley College, Van Nuys, California, November 1984, in Ger-
    aldine Ferraro, Ferraro: My Story (New York: Bantam, 1985), p. 292,
    italics in the original.
21. For an analysis of partnerships and their importance in a military context,
    see Major General Baron Hugo von Freytag-Loringhoven, "The Power of
    Personality in War," in Roots of Strategy: 3 Military Classics, Book 3
    (Harrisburg, PA: Stackpole, 1991), pp. 326-341.
22. Regarding his note, see Kennedy, Thirteen Days, p. 9. Robert Kennedy
    does not explain exactly what he meant to communicate by his note. I am
    inferring these meanings, as have other scholars, including Robert C.
    Tucker, in Politics as Leadership (Columbia: University of Missouri Press,
    1981), p. 48.
23. See Allan R. Cohen and David L. Bradford, Influence without Authority
    (New York: Wiley, 1989).
                                         Notes to Pages 272-273 / 337

24. Margaret J. Rioch, '''All We Like Sheep-' [Isaiah 53:6]: Followers and
    Leaders," in Colman and Bexton, eds., Group Relations Reader, p. 170.
25. See Wilfred R. Bion, "Selections from: Experiences in Groups," in Colman
    and Bexton, eds., Group Relations Reader, pp. 11-20; Shapiro and Carr,
    Lost in Familiar Places, pp. 78-94; and Larry Hirschhorn, The Workplace
    Within: Psychodynamics of Organizational Life (Cambridge: MIT Press,
    1988), pp. 110-113.
                 Acknowledgments


There are no public words adequate to the feelings I have for the
people who have seen me through this work.
   Sousan Abadian, my wife, provided extraordinary assistance with
the manuscript. She made contributions of the most fundamental
kind to the clarity of the analysis: to the broad conceptual frame-
work, the structure of chapters, and the details of paragraphs and
sentences. Moreover, she provided the right mix of loving patience
and limit-setting to help me keep my priorities straight at home. I
cannot imagine this book without her personal, moral, and intellec-
tual help.
   Riley Sinder and I have generated ideas together for twenty-three
years. Some of these ideas are published jointly in other places. Many
serve as the intuitions and underpinnings of this book, which he
painstakingly edited. Crossing disciplines has not been an easy en-
terprise for me, intellectually or personally, and Sinder helped fashion
the path.
   My colleagues at Harvard University's John F. Kennedy School of
Government invested ten years in this synthesis. Deans Graham
Allison and Albert Carnesale took the risk that the subject of lead-
ership could be given conceptual clarity and that critical elements of
its practice could be taught. Several current and former colleagues,
Alan Altshuler, Philip Heymann, Robert Klitgaard, "Dutch"
Leonard, Martin Linsky, Ernest May, Mark Moore, Richard Neu-
stadt, Joseph Nye, Michael O'Hare, Robert Reich, Thomas Schel-
                                  339
340   I   Acknowledgments

ling, Edith Stokey, and Peter Zimmerman, brought me along from
the start, giving me courage and steadfast personal and intellectual
assistance. Each of these friends in a quite unique way contributed
greatly to the rigor of these ideas and to the process of writing them
down. Each went far beyond the call of duty. Some even read the
manuscript twice. Several served the essential and quite personal role
of confidant. From the fall of 1989 through June 1991, our Faculty
Seminar on Leadership, chaired by Altshuler, provided a spirited
forum that catalyzed and enriched these efforts. Chris Argyris, who
joined our seminar from the Harvard Business School, offered con-
sistent partnership. Theresa Monroe provided extraordinary and
enduring colleagueship.
   I am also very grateful to my colleagues-both from within the
Kennedy SchoollHarvard community and from other educational
institutions-who generously read an entire draft of the manuscript
and gave me the benefit of their substantial insights. I thank James
David Barber, Eugene Bardach, Derek Bok, James MacGregor Burns,
John Gardner, Jerome Kagan, Joseph Kalt, Barbara Kellerman,
Steven Kelman, Sharon Daloz Parks, Jerrold Post, Howard Prince,
Joseph Rost, Dennis Thompson, Walter Ulmer, William Ury, and the
late Aaron Wildavsky. I hope they can see the signs of their handi-
work (Aaron from on high).
   Several friends outside the academy also did yeoman's service in
reading and commenting on the whole manuscript. I am truly grate-
ful to Bahman Abadian, Merribel Ayers, Donald Laurie, Hillel
Levine, David Margulies, Lawrence Navon, Scott Peck, and Robert
Ronnow. They contributed with great care.
   Edward Shapiro, who helped to train me in psychiatry, has con-
tinued over the years to lend his point of view on my teaching and
writing. I appreciate his help in applying psychiatric insight and
group relations theory to politics, organizations, and teaching.
   Other people helped greatly with specific portions of the book.
My father and eldest brother, Milton Heifetz and Laurence Heifetz,
both doctors, helped with the Buchanan case and analysis. Professors
Richard Wrangham and Marc Hauser of the Harvard Department
of Anthropology each reviewed a draft of Chapter Three on the roots
of authority and corrected large and small errors in my thinking
about primate behavior. John Thomas at the Harvard Institute for
                                            Acknowledgments    I 341

International Development gave me years of encouragement as well
as specific help on the Aquino material. Ashton Carter, Professor of
Science and International Affairs at the Kennedy School, reviewed
my analysis of Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative. Henry Lee,
Executive Director of our Energy and Environmental Programs, gave
me assistance in researching the Tacoma case. Dr. Jo Ann Van Tilburg
of the Institute for Archeology at UCLA assisted generously with the
Easter Island case. William Kovach, David Lax, James Sebenius, and
a group of Nieman fellows and friends graciously and with good
humor helped me find a title for the book.
   I am deeply indebted to my former students. Not only have they
provided me with the invaluable opportunity to learn from their
stories and insights, but many of them have continued to give en-
couragement of the most essential kind to my teaching and writing
efforts. Some of them have become major collaborators in the area
of leadership education-at the Kennedy School and in other settings
more distant-both professional and academic. I mention only a
few who contributed specifically to encouraging and improving
this book: Thomas Bennett, Stephen Boyd, Jenny Gelber, Thomas
Landy, Daniel Mulhern, Majd Nurishafiq, Hugh O'Doherty, Galia
Saouma, and Pamela Steiner.
   John Hilliard served heroically as my research assistant during the
first two years of the project. Wendy Kaminer came on board in the
last year to help transform a rough set of chapters into a viable
manuscript. Mary Jane Rose worked steadily during the frenetic last
phase, recovering hundreds of books and articles from the libraries
at Harvard as I checked the notes. Their wit, spirit, and remarkable
efforts are much appreciated.
   My editors at Harvard University Press, Susan Wallace Boehmer
and Aida Donald, went way beyond their standard procedures-al-
ready prodigious-in shepherding the manuscript through its last
phases and supervising its production. Marc Jaffe and Joy Harris
gave me much needed professional advice on the publishing industry,
as well as useful feedback on drafts. Linda Healey shaped the concept
of the book at the outset. Susan Grant scanned the manuscript for
prejudicial language.
   Finally, three institutions gave sustained and generous funding to
support this research. The money, however, provided even more than
342   /   Acknowledgments

the time and resources that I bought with it. In a moral sense, the
money represented a trust that gave me the heart to begin and press
on despite recurrent doubts. Marianna Bridge, Richard Broholm,
Craig Dykstra, Fred Hofheinz, and Susan Wisely at the Lilly Endow-
ment have been partners in the truest sense. Robert Armstrong and
Henry Luce III of the Henry Luce Foundation believed in this effort
when it was not too much more than a rough set of ideas coupled
with enthusiasm; so did Bayley Mason at our development office.
Marvin Moss, Fred Saalfeld, Philip Selwyn, and Albert Wood from
the Office of Naval Research gave me the courage to find applica-
tions that at first I did not see. I am truly grateful for all of their
confidence.
                                       Index


Abernathy, Ralph, 214, 223, 224, 228-229         98, 125, 188, 205; defined, 57; domi-
Absolute good concept, 85                        nance and, 57-61; loss of, 57; coercion
Adams, Chuck, 201-204, 205,270                   and, 59, 105-106; culture and, 61-64;
Adaptation, 5, 8, 28, 69, 237; biological, 3,    social functions of, 62, 66; capabilities
  28-29, 30-31; social, 3-4, 30, 32-33,          under, 103-104, 114-115, 218-219; re-
  205; cultural, 31; failure of, 37; re-         sistence to, 118, 201-202; of women,
  sponse, 44-45, 126; leadership with            184-185, 267-268; boundaries of, 185-
  authority and, 126-129. See also Chal-          187, 217-219; moral, 189, 191, 218;
  lenge(s); Work, adaptive                       risks of, 236-237, 246-247; institutional,
Aggression, 51-53                                265. See also Direction; Leadership; Or-
Agnew, Spiro, 171                                der; Protection
Anthony, Susan B., 186, 187                     Authority figure(s), 6, 48, 59, 128-129,
Aquino, Corazon, 238, 239, 244                   220, 225, 229; stress and, 48, 251; re-
Asarco copper plant. See Tacoma case             sponse formulation by, 87; access to in-
Assassination of leaders, 248                    furmation, 114-115, 192-193;
Attention: control and direction of, 103,        expectations of, 125; placing of, 166-
  113-114, 139, 188, 199; structuring of,         170; actions beyond boundaries, 205,
  50; lightning rod of, 94, 114, 208, 224-       217-219; systematic stress and, 219-
  227; to the issues, 141-142, 208, 218,         224, 261; protection of, 224-225; dan-
  223,225,226,260-263,267                        gers to, 236-238; deposition of,
Authority, 1, 2, 3, 8, 15, 100, 108, 205,        238-239; work avoidance and, 261, 262.
  236-237; relationships, 4, 49, 64, 66, 69-     See also Leadership
  70, 71, 73, 85; trust as, 4, 101, 106; for-   Autocratic actions and processes, 155-163,
  mal, 13, 15, 56, 83, 101-103, 111, 117,         172,225,242
  123,128,161,173,185-186,202-203,              Autonomy, 158, 175
  262; informal, 13, 56, 83, 101-103, 106,      Avoidance. See Work, adaptive: avoidance
  111-112, 117, 128, 156, 185-186, 200-          of
  203, 257, 262; in adaptive work, 26,
  126, 185, 187; constraints on, 26, 88,        Baker, Wilson, 215-216, 220


                                            343
344 I Index

Ball, George, 168                              Clean Air Act, 88-89
Barnes, Ernesta, 91, 124                       Clinton, Bill, 117
Bias, 3, 5                                     Coercion, 58, 59, 60, 105-106, 112
Birth control and abortion issues. See         Collins, LeRoy, 224, 229
  Sanger, Margaret                             Community, 26, 27, 70, 259
Boundaries of authority, 185-187, 205,         Competition, 62, 63
  217-219                                      Conference, of power, 59
Boynton, Amelia, 209, 211-212, 217-218,        Conflict(s), 26, 64; of values, 3-4, 5, 23,
  221,226,228                                    25, 31, 33, 138-139, 188, 275; resolu-
Boynton, Sam, 211, 218                           tion, 5,121, 188; orchestration of, 22,
Brady, Nicholas, 3                               103-104, 113, 117-121, 165, 192, 199;
Buchanan case, 76-84, 102, 106, 187, 236,        in social systems, 33-35; internal, 62, 63,
  237, 244; adaptive work in, 76-84, 86-         69, 266, 267; over power, 254; group,
  88, 102, 103, 104, 106, 107-109; leader-       257-258; destructive, 260; externalizing,
  ship expertise, 84-86; implications,           265-268
  86-88; authority issues, 103, 104, 107-      Connor, Bull, 211, 216
  109, 242; holding environment in, 104-       Contingency theory, 17, 18, 19
  110; attention shifts, 113-114; framing      Coping strategies, 3, 26, 27. See also Adap-
  the issues, 115-116; orchestration of          tation
  conflicts, 117-118; decisionmaking strat-    Creativity and innovation, 6, 26, 66, 88,
  egy, 122-123                                   187; deviance, 183-206; improvisation,
Bundy, McGeorge, 156, 264                        272
Burford, Anne Gorsuch, 97, 102                 Culture, 61-64
Bush, George, 1, 8, 40, 251
                                               Darwin, Charles, 54
Cambodia, 170, 171, 175. See also Viet-        Decisionmaking, 104, 111, 112, 113;
  nam war                                        group, 119-120, 122; choice of process,
Carlyle, Thomas, 16                              121-124; autocratic, 121-123, 150, 160,
Carter, Jimmy, 178-180, 251                      161-162, 164-166, 178, 227. See also
Challenge(s): adaptive, 3, 5, 8, 28, 64, 65,     Johnson, Lyndon
  72,88,95,99,122,138-139,175,190,             Deference, 54, 55, 56, 60; habitual, 58-59
  207, 237-238, 254-258; to equilibrium,       Denial, 79, 82
  35-37; rejection of, 228                     Dependenc~ 70-72, 83-84, 98,247,248,
Change, adaptive, 75, 85                         262; mutual, 106
Charismatic authority, 53, 64-66, 246-248,     Determinism, biological, 54
  249                                          Deviance. See Creativity and innovation
Chestnut, J. L., Jr., 210, 230-231             Dickenson, Robert Latou, 197-198, 199-
Civil disobedience, nonviolent, 191, 192,        200
  193,205                                      Direction, 69, 74, 79, 107, 114, 125, 241;
Civil Rights Act, 131, 134, 139                  in voting rights case, 139, 218; in Viet-
Civil Rights Bill, 135                           nam war case, 160; leadership and, 184,
Civil rights movement, 143-144, 147, 148,        220, 237
  164,223,229-230,235,243,249,253,             Dirksen, Everett, 131-132, 222
  265. See also King, Martin Luther, Jr.       Disequilibrium, 28, 120, 122, 139, 223; dy-
Clark, Jim, 211-212, 214, 216, 220, 221,         namics, 35-40; social, 127, 191; regula-
  223,224,225,229                                tion of, 140, 192
                                                                         Index     I   345

Disrespect, 255                                Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, 152, 153, 168,
Distress. See Stress                            169,265
Distrust, 107
Diversification, 94-95, 96, 123                Hare, James, 212, 215
Doar, John, 210                                Hierarchy, in primate societies, 51-56
Dominance, 15, 70; in primate societies,       Hitler, Adolf, 18, 23-25, 65-66
  50-53; deference and, 54, 55, 56; in chil-   Ho Chi Minh, 163, 168,170
  dren, 55-56; authority and, 57-61            Holding environment, 66, 103; leadership
                                                 capabilities for, 103-104, 128; manage-
Eisenhower, Dwight, 134, 142, 160, 171,          ment of, 104-113, 207, 243-244; in Ta-
  178                                            coma case, 110-113, 120; in civil rights
Ellsberg, Daniel, 172                            case, 130; in Vietnam war case, 162,
Environment, 5, 28-29, 32, 97, 99, 100,          170, 173, 179; leadership without author-
  252, 265-266. See also Holding environ-        ityand, 187-188; voting rights case,
  ment; Tacoma case                              221; defined, 240; pacing the work and,
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA),           241-242; stress of, 243-244; responsibil-
  88,90-110,111-113,120,244,266,                 ity for, 250
  269                                          Hoover, J. Edgar, 189, 225
Equilibrium, 28, 51, 275; restoration of,
  42,65,220-221,237,259,260,271                Inclusion, 239-241
Evolution, 30-31                               Influenc~ 14-19,26
                                               Information, 103, 106, 160, 272; manage-
Ferraro, Geraldine, 266-268                       ment of, 103, 109, 113, 114-117, 188,
Focus. See Issue(s)                               242, 269; authority figures and, 114-
Forman, James, 211                                115, 192-193; lack of, 118; frontline,
Fossey, Dian, 51                                  188,200
Foster, Marie, 209, 210, 211-212, 217-         Innovation. See Creativity and innova-
  218,221,226,228                                 tion
Framing strategy. See Issue(s)                 Intelligence, 29
Friendship, 105                                Issue(s), 266; framing of, 103, 113, 115-
Fulbright, J. William, 162-163                    117,141-142,168,188,199,218,267,
                                                  270; sequencing of, 109, 116, 123, 164;
Gandhi, Mohandas K., 183, 186, 187,200,           ripening of, 116, 117, 129, 168, 170,
  226, 241; leadership without authority,         207, 208; focus on, 188-189, 260-263;
  184, 189-194; informal authority, 190,          dramatization of, 190; attention to, 208,
  191, 205, 218, 270                              260-263, 267; representation of, 226-
Goldwater, Barry, 152, 168                        227; dynamics, 255
Goodall, Jane, 52
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 59-60                      Jackson, Jimmee Lee, 216, 223
Great-man theory of history, 16, 17-18         Jackson, Kevin, 256, 264
Great Society, 151, 153, 156, 163, 167,        Johnson, Lyndon, 46, 180, 189,245-246,
  169. See also Johnson, Lyndon                  269; leadership strategy for civil rights,
Group(s), 56-57; factions, 118-119, 124,         130-131, 133-138, 166, 243; leadership
  186, 255-258; decisionmaking, 119-120,         strategy for voting rights, 133-149, 179,
  122; protection of authority figure, 224-      212, 222, 224; leadership strategy for
  225; stress, 256-258                           Vietnam war, 150-170, 175, 227, 244,
346 I Index

Johnson, Lyndon (continued)                      holding environment, 207; mobilization
  253, 265; informal authority, 156; formal      of stakeholders, 227-231; stress of, 252
  authority, 161, 187                          Learning, 30, 187, 200, 244-245, 251
Justice, 189, 190, 193                         Lewis, Carol, 273
                                               Lincoln, Abraham, 186,241
Kennedy, John E, 129, 130, 142, 157, 178,      Lingo, AI, 216, 223, 224
  189, 229; and Cuban missile crisis, 44,      Listening, 271-273
  264-265,269,273
Kennedy, Robert, 189, 215, 264-265,            Malcolm X, 222
  269                                          Management: stress, 35, 139-141, 207-
Khrushchev, Nikita, 264-265, 269                208, 221-222, 223; risk, 97, 99, 100; of
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 130, 133-136,         holding environment, 104-113,207,243-
  141,144,187,200,210-213,241,247;              244
  informal authority, 183, 185, 186, 218,      Mansfield, Mike, 135, 156, 162, 163
  219, 270; focus on issues, 188-189;          Marcos, Ferdinand, 238, 239, 244
  Selma march for voting rights, 213-216,      Marshall, Burke, 215
  218; Montgomery march for voting             Martyrdom, 246-249
  rights, 220, 221-223, 226, 228-229; as-      McNamara, Robert, 153, 155
  sassination, 248, 265; dependency of fol-    Medical example. See Buchanan case
  lowers on, 249. See also Civil rights        Meredith, James, 134
  movement; Voting rights                      Mobilization, 191; of adaptive response,
King, Rodney, 1, 3                              126, 185, 259; without leadership, 184,
                                                185, 199; of stakeholders, 227-231
Lafayette, Bernard, 210-211, 218, 226, 228     Montgomery march. See Voting rights
Leadership, 1, 7-9, 13-15, 26, 42, 205,        Muskie, Edmund, 172-173
  236-237, 275-276; challenge of, 2, 225,
  247; in crises, 2, 125; power and, 4, 24,    NAACP, 131
  101; values, 4, 13-14, 16-19; defined,       Nixon, Richard, 44, 46, 170-175
  15, 18, 19-27, 85; goals, 20-21, 22, 23;     Norms, 25, 26, 63-64, 71-72, 200, 219;
  adaptive work and, 22, 24-25, 26, 126-         implicit, 14; in decisionmaking, 121-122;
  129; failure of, 24, 72-73, 275; princi-       deviance from, 192, 201-204; military,
  ples, 128, 207; autocratic, 158, 175, 251;     204; of leadership without authority, 205-
  presidential, 177-180; options, 202-204;       206
  danger/risk of, 235-239, 243, 244; mar-
  tyrdom and, 246-249; overall perspec-        Order, 1, 69,74, 79, 83, 107, 114, 125,
  tive, 253-263; partners in, 268-271,           139, 160, 218, 241; without leadership,
  272, 273; sanctuary for, 273-274. See          184; with leadership, 220, 237
  also Authority; Pacing the work; Protec-     Organization of support services, 109, 118
  tion                                         Owens, J. H., 210
Leadership with authority, 8, 49-50, 101,
  113,126,173-177, 188-189; Buchanan           Pacification, 215
  case, 87, 103-104; Tacoma case, 102,         Pacing the work, 39-40, 46, 241-246, 259;
  103; civil rights case, 129-132; voting        mobilization of adaptive work, 80, 82,
  rights case, 132-138; principles of, 138-      83, 109; work avoidance and, 163-165;
  144                                            in voting rights case, 218; in holding envi-
Leadership without authority, 8, 183-189,        ronments, 241-242
  220-221; norms of, 205-206; control of       Parsons, Barbara. See Buchanan case
                                                                          Index     I 347

Partners, 268-271, 272, 273                     Roosevelt, Franklin, 23, 46, 65, 105, 122,
Power, 4-5, 60, 105; leadership and, 4, 14,       162, 180, 198,24~251
  21, 101, 112; authority and, 70, 101;         Roosevelt, Theodore, 157
  conflicts, 254                                Ruckelshaus, William, 88-100, 110-112,
Primate societies, 50-53, 54                      114,116-120,167,237,241,244,265-
Problem(s), 2, 5, 22; technical, 8, 71-72,        266; formal authority, 123-124, 187; al-
  87, 88, 95, 175; defined, 74, 75, 86; solv-     lies of, 269
  ing, 74, 118-119, 121; authoritative ac-      Russell, Richard, 131
  tion and, 87-88
Process expertise, 84-86, 104                   Sanger, Margaret, 183, 185, 186, 187, 205,
Protection, 69, 74, 79, 107, 114, 125, 214,       226, 270; leadership without authority,
  218; in voting rights case, 139, 218; of        194-201
  voices of leadership, 144, 186, 207, 270-     Scapegoating, 2, 38, 97, 126, 147, 260-
  271; in Vietnam war case, 160; of voters,       261; of authority figure, 237-328
  183; without leadership, 184; with leader-    Schaller, George, 51
  ship, 220, 237; of authority figures, 224-    Schlesinger, Arthur, Sr., 226
  225                                           Self: deception, 46; determination, 189; gov-
Provocation, 207-208                               ernment, 247-248; observation by lead-
Public opinion, 172-173, 174-175, 179,             ers, 271-273
   100, 130                                     Selma march. See Voting rights
Purpose, 274-275                                Sequencing. See Issue(s)
                                                Situationalists, 16-17
Racism, 1, 54, 135, 137, 141-142, 147,          Situation types, 74-76, 84, 86, 88, 104, 190
   200, 219, 222, 243. See also Civil rights     Skills, predictable, 107-108
   movement; Voting rights                       Smitherman, Joe, 214-215, 220
Reagan, Ronald, 40-42, 45-48, 97, 251,           Society, 4, 61, 66; stress of, 26, 65; social
   266                                              systems, 29-35, 39, 86, 118, 184,208,
Reality testing, 22-23; concept of leader-          242, 253; primate, 50-53; dominance/
   ship and, 24, 26, 163; for adaptive work,        hierarchy patterns, 51-53; human, 54-57
   31, 35, 113; disequilibrium and, 38-39;       Southern Christian Leadership Conference
   by authority figures, 114-115; political,        (SCLC), 210, 212, 222
   175, 178                                      Spencer, Herbert, 16
Reeb, James J., 136, 137                         Stability. See Equilibrium
Reese, Fred, 208-209, 211-212, 217, 218,         Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 186, 187
   221,226,228,254                               Strategic Defense Initiative, 40-48
Responsibility, 6, 60, 66, 188, 247, 276; ac-    Stress, 1, 4, 22, 66, 239; of adaptation, 3,
   ceptance of,S, 26, 44; for actions, 20,          103, 104, 105, 109, 121; social, 26, 65;
   139; diffusion of, 86-87; given back to          equilibrium and, 35; management, 35,
   the people, 119-120, 121, 123, 148-149,          139-141, 207-208,221-222, 223; re-
   207, 251, 262-263; shared, 121; for              sponseto, 38-39, 57, 72,250-251,259-
   adaptive work, 237, 238; ethic of, 250           261; authority and, 48, 64-66, 220-224;
 Richards, John, 203-204, 205                       regulation, 86, 99-100, 164, 175, 188,
 Ripening concept. See Issue(s)                     258-260; holding environment and, 104-
 Risk: management, 97-99, 100; of leader-           113, 243-244; changed into work, 113,
   ship, 235-239, 243, 244                          259; systemic, 208, 219-224, 254-255;
 Role(s), 125, 126, 194; /self distinction,         tolerance, 242; personal, 250-251, 252,
   163-165,266-267,268                              254; of leadership, 252, 271
348 I Index

Student Non-Violent Coordinating Commit-          sons for autocratic actions, 159-163;
  tee (SNCC), 210, 211, 218                       holding environments, 162, 170, 173,
Support services, 109, 118                        179; pacing vs. work avoidance, 163-
Symbolism, 64                                     165; Nixon's strategy and loss of power,
                                                  170-1 77; bombing mission example of
Tacoma case (Asarco copper plant), 236,           lack of leadership, 201-204
  241, 242; mobilization of adaptive work,      Voting rights, 132-138, 244; principles of
  88-95, 110; implications of, 95-100;            leadership (Selma march), 138-144, 179;
  holding environment, 110-113, 120; at-          frontline perspective (Selma march), 208-
  tention shifts, 118; factions, 119-121          216; holding environment, 221;
Technical work, 254; problems, 8, 71-72,          Montgomery march, 222, 223-224
  87, 88, 95, 175; vs. adaptive work, 35,       Voting Rights Act, 149, 244
  73-76, 85, 87, 98-99, 126; dependence,        Voting Rights Bill, 154-155
  83; expertise, 84-86, 104, 121, 178, 266;     Vulnerability, 40-48
  autocratic actions and, 159-163; foreign
  policy and, 174                               Walesa, Lech, 185
Teller, Edward, 40, 41, 45                      Wallace, George, 133, 137, 211, 214, 220,
Tradition, 33-34, 64                             229, 253, 255; economic and social re-
Traits, 16, 17, 19, 20                           form strategies, 130, 143-144; on segre-
Truman, Harry, 157, 178                          gation, 133
Trust, 4, 100, 102, 122; authority as, 4,       Watergate, 172-173, 176-177, 178
  101, 106; holding environments and,           Weber, Max, 64, 250
  105, 106, 113; relationship of authority      Weiner, Ruth, 97
  derived from, 106-108, 109, 111; loss         Westmoreland, William, 154
  of, 108; in authorities, 101, 164, 172-       Wilkins, Roy, 131, 270
  173; violation of, 173-175                    Wilson, Woodrow, 162
Types, situational, 74-76, 84, 86, 88, 104,     Women's rights, 194-201. See also Sanger,
  190                                            Margaret
                                                Work, adaptive, 7,23, 24-26, 27, 47, 72;
Unpredictability, 107-108                        conflicts of values and, 3-4, 5, 23, 25,
                                                 31-32, 33, 138-139, 188, 275; avoid-
Values, 18, 148; conflicts and clarification,    ance of, 5, 36-40, 73, 163-165, 176,
  3-4, 5, 23, 25, 31, 33, 138-139, 188,          221-222,237,260,261-262; defined,
  275; explicit, 4; implicit or hidden, 4-5,     22; leadership and, 22, 24-25, 26, 126-
  14, 16-19; of leadership, 13-14, 18, 19-       129; authority factor in, 26, 126, 185,
  20, 26; in adaptive work, 23, 35; cul-         187; vs. technical work, 35, 73-76, 85,
  tural, 25; traditional, 33-34; mix, 35;        87, 98-99, 126; holding environment
  predictable, 107-108; shared, 121, 193,        and, 105-106; short-run solutions, 129;
  254,275                                        orchestration of, 180; given back to soci-
Vietnam war: Johnson's strategy, 151-155,        ety, 227; responsibility for, 238-239;
  165-170, 227, 244, 253, 265; sources of        stress of, 242, 247
  autocratic action, 155-159; technical rea-
